
1. J Agric Food Chem. 2017 Mar 27. doi: 10.1021/acs.jafc.7b00573. [Epub ahead of
print]

Proteomic Identification of eEF1A1 as a Molecular Target of Curcumol for
Suppressing Metastasis of MDA-MB-231 Cells.

Qi H, Ning L, Yu Z, Dou G, Li L.

Curcumol, a major volatile component in Rhizoma Curcumae, exhibited potent
anti-metastatic effect on breast cancer cells. However, its molecular mechanism
remains poorly understood. In this study, we employed a 2-DE based proteomics to 
investigate the cellular targets of curcumol in MDA-MB-231 cells, and identified 
10 differentially expressed proteins. Moreover, Gene Ontology analysis revealed
that those proteins mainly get involved in 9 types of cellular components, 7
different biological processes and 9 kinds of molecular functions, and 35
pathways (p < 0.05) were enriched by KEGG pathway analysis. Specially, eEF1A1, a 
well-characterized actin binding protein, draws our attention. Curcumol decreased
eEF1A1 expression at both mRNA and protein levels. EEF1A1 expression was shown to
be correlated with the invasiveness of cancer cells. Importantly, overexpression 
of eEF1A1 significantly reversed the inhibition of curcumol on the invasion and
adhesion of MDA-MB-231 cells (p < 0.05). Together, our data suggest that eEF1A1
may be a potential molecular target underlying the anti-metastatic effect of
curcumol.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jafc.7b00573 
PMID: 28345336 


1. BMC Med Genomics. 2017 Mar 15;10(1):12. doi: 10.1186/s12920-017-0245-6.

Comprehensive discovery of subsample gene expression components by information
explanation: therapeutic implications in cancer.

Pepke S(1), Ver Steeg G(2).

Author information: 
(1)Lyrid LLC, South Pasadena, USA. spepke@lyridllc.com. (2)Information Sciences
Institute, University of Southern California, Marina Del Rey, USA.

BACKGROUND: De novo inference of clinically relevant gene function relationships 
from tumor RNA-seq remains a challenging task. Current methods typically either
partition patient samples into a few subtypes or rely upon analysis of pairwise
gene correlations that will miss some groups in noisy data. Leveraging higher
dimensional information can be expected to increase the power to discern
targetable pathways, but this is commonly thought to be an intractable
computational problem.
METHODS: In this work we adapt a recently developed machine learning algorithm
for sensitive detection of complex gene relationships. The algorithm, CorEx,
efficiently optimizes over multivariate mutual information and can be iteratively
applied to generate a hierarchy of relatively independent latent factors. The
learned latent factors are used to stratify patients for survival analysis with
respect to both single factors and combinations. These analyses are performed and
interpreted in the context of biological function annotations and protein network
interactions that might be utilized to match patients to multiple therapies.
RESULTS: Analysis of ovarian tumor RNA-seq samples demonstrates the algorithm's
power to infer well over one hundred biologically interpretable gene cohorts,
several times more than standard methods such as hierarchical clustering and
k-means. The CorEx factor hierarchy is also informative, with related but
distinct gene clusters grouped by upper nodes. Some latent factors correlate with
patient survival, including one for a pathway connected with the
epithelial-mesenchymal transition in breast cancer that is regulated by a
microRNA that modulates epigenetics. Further, combinations of factors lead to a
synergistic survival advantage in some cases.
CONCLUSIONS: In contrast to studies that attempt to partition patients into a
small number of subtypes (typically 4 or fewer) for treatment purposes, our
approach utilizes subgroup information for combinatoric transcriptional
phenotyping. Considering only the 66 gene expression groups that are found to
both have significant Gene Ontology enrichment and are small enough to indicate
specific drug targets implies a computational phenotype for ovarian cancer that
allows for 3(66) possible patient profiles, enabling truly personalized
treatment. The findings here demonstrate a new technique that sheds light on the 
complexity of gene expression dependencies in tumors and could eventually enable 
the use of patient RNA-seq profiles for selection of personalized and effective
cancer treatments.

DOI: 10.1186/s12920-017-0245-6 
PMCID: PMC5351169
PMID: 28292312 


1. Data Brief. 2017 Feb 9;11:169-182. doi: 10.1016/j.dib.2017.02.006. eCollection
2017.

DNA methylation data for identification of epigenetic targets of resveratrol in
triple negative breast cancer cells.

Medina-Aguilar R(1), Pérez-Plasencia C(2), Gariglio P(1), Marchat LA(3),
Flores-Pérez A(4), López-Camarillo C(4), García Mena J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departmento de Genética y Biología Molecular, Centro de Investigación y de
Estudios Avanzados del Instituto Politécnico Nacional (Cinvestav-IPN), México
City, México. (2)Unidad de Biomedicina, FES-Iztacala UNAM, Tlalnepantla, Estado
de México, México. (3)Escuela Nacional de Medicina y Homeopatía. Red de
Biotecnología. Instituto Politécnico Nacional, México City, México.
(4)Laboratorio de Oncogenómica y Proteómica del Cáncer, Universidad Autónoma de
la Ciudad de México, México City, México.

Previous studies revealed that some bioactive food components have anti-cancer
effects. However epigenetic effects of dietary compound resveratrol are largely
unknown in breast cancer cells (M.A. Dawson, T. Kouzarides, 2012) [1]. Here we
provide novel data and comparisons of DNA methylation status of promoter gene
regions in response to resveratrol treatment at 24 h and 48 h versus untreated
MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells. DNA methylation changes were measured using
Array-PRIMES method (aPRIMES) followed by whole-genome hybridization using human 
DNA methylation promoter microarray NimbleGen HG18 Refseq Promoter 3×720 K array.
Our data were associated to corresponding changes in mRNA expression in a set of 
cancer-related genes. Using gene ontology analysis we also identify
cancer-related cellular processes and pathways that can be epigenetically
reprogramed by resveratrol. Data in this article are associated to the research
articles "Methylation Landscape of Human Breast Cancer Cells in Response to
Dietary Compound Resveratrol". Medina Aguilar et al., PLoS ONE 11(6): e0157866.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0157866 2016 (A.R. Medina, P.C. Pérez, L.A. Marchat, P. 
Gariglio, M.J. García, C.S. Rodríguez, G.E. Ruíz, et al., 2016) [2]; and
"Resveratrol inhibits cell cycle progression by targeting Aurora kinase A and
Polo-like kinase 1 in breast cancer cells" in Oncology Reports. Medina Aguilar et
al., 2016 Jun; 35(6):3696-704. doi: 10.3892/or.2016.4728 (A.R. Medina, P.
Gariglio, M.J. García, O.E. Arechaga, S.N. Villegas, C.M. Martínez et al., 2016) 
[3].

DOI: 10.1016/j.dib.2017.02.006 
PMCID: PMC5312642
PMID: 28229117 


1. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2017 Feb 17. pii: ERC-16-0463. doi: 10.1530/ERC-16-0463.
[Epub ahead of print]

Vitamin D receptor as a target for breast cancer therapy.

Murray A(1), Madden S(2), Synnott NC(3), Klinger R(4), O'Connor D(5), O'Donovan
N(6), Gallagher W(7), Crown J(8), Duffy M(9).

Author information: 
(1)A Murray, School of Medicine and Medical Science, University College Dublin,
Dublin, Ireland dr.alysonmurray@gmail.com. (2)S Madden, Department of Psychology,
Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, Dublin, Ireland. (3)N Synnott, tumor
biology, University College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland. (4)R Klinger, UCD School of 
Biomolecular and Biomedical Science, University College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland. 
(5)D O'Connor, Department of Molecular & Cellular Therapeutics, Royal College of 
Surgeons in Ireland, Dublin, Ireland. (6)N O'Donovan, National Institute for
Cellular Biotechnology, Dublin City University, Dublin, Ireland. (7)W Gallagher, 
University College Dublin, UCD School of Biomolecular and Biomedical Science,
Conway Institute, Dublin, Ireland. (8)J Crown, Medical Oncology, Saint Vincent's 
University Hospital, Dublin, Ireland. (9)M Duffy, UCD School of Medicine and
Medical Science, University College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland.

Considerable epidemiological evidence suggests that high levels of circulating
vitamin D (VD) are associated with a decreased incidence and increased survival
from cancer, i.e., VD may possess anti-cancer properties. The aim of this
investigation was therefore to investigate the anti-cancer potential of a low
calcemic vitamin D analogue, i.e., inecalcitol and compare it with the active
form of vitamin D, i.e., calcitriol, in a panel of breast cancer cell lines (n = 
15). Using the MTT assay, IC50 concentrations for response to calcitriol varied
from 0.12 µM to >20 µM, while those for inecalcitol were significantly lower,
ranging from 2.5 nM to 63 nM (p = 0.001). Sensitivity to calcitriol and
inecalcitol was higher in VD receptor (VDR)-positive compared to VDR-negative
cell lines (p = 0.0007 and 0.0080, respectively) and in ER-positive compared to
ER-negative cell lines (p = 0.043 and 0.005, respectively). Using RNA-seq
analysis, substantial but not complete overlap was found between genes
differentially regulated by calcitriol and inecalcitol. In particular,
significantly enriched gene ontology terms such as cell surface signalling and
cell communication were found following treatment with inecalcitol but not with
calcitriol. In contrast, ossification and bone morphogenesis were found
significantly enriched following treatment with calcitriol but not with
inecalcitol. Our preclinical results suggest that calcitriol and inecalcitol can 
inhibit breast cancer cell line growth, especially in cells expressing ER and
VDR. As inecalcitol, is significantly more potent than calcitriol and has low
calcemic potential, it should be further investigated for the treatment of breast
cancer.

DOI: 10.1530/ERC-16-0463 
PMID: 28213567 


1. Clin Transl Med. 2017 Dec;6(1):5. doi: 10.1186/s40169-016-0133-2. Epub 2017 Jan
18.

The antineoplastic drug, trastuzumab, dysregulates metabolism in iPSC-derived
cardiomyocytes.

Necela BM(1), Axenfeld BC(1), Serie DJ(2), Kachergus JM(1), Perez EA(3), Thompson
EA(1), Norton N(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL, USA.
(2)Department of Health Sciences Research, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL, USA.
(3)Department of Hematology Oncology, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL, USA.
(4)Department of Cancer Biology, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL, USA.
Norton.nadine@mayo.edu.

BACKGROUND: The targeted ERBB2 therapy, trastuzumab, has had a tremendous impact 
on management of patients with HER2+ breast cancer, leading to development and
increased use of further HER2 targeted therapies. The major clinical side effect 
is cardiotoxicity but the mechanism is largely unknown. On the basis that gene
expression is known to be altered in multiple models of heart failure, we
examined differential gene expression of iPSC-derived cardiomyocytes treated at
day 11 with the ERBB2 targeted monoclonal antibody, trastuzumab for 48 h and the 
small molecule tyrosine kinase inhibitor of EGFR and ERBB2.
RESULTS: Transcriptome sequencing was performed on four replicates from each
group (48 h untreated, 48 h trastuzumab and 48 h lapatinib) and differential gene
expression analyses were performed on each treatment group relative to untreated 
cardiomyocytes. 517 and 1358 genes were differentially expressed, p < 0.05,
respectively in cardiomyocytes treated with trastuzumab and lapatinib. Gene
ontology analyses revealed in cardiomyocytes treated with trastuzumab,
significant down-regulation of genes involved in small molecule metabolism
(p = 3.22 × 10(-9)) and cholesterol (p = 0.01) and sterol (p = 0.03) processing. 
We next measured glucose uptake and lactate production in iPSC-derived
cardiomyocytes 13 days post-plating, treated with trastuzumab up to 96 h. We
observed significantly decreased glucose uptake from the media of iPSC-derived
cardiomyocytes treated with trastuzumab as early as 24 h (p = 0.001) and
consistently up to 96 h (p = 0.03).
CONCLUSIONS: Our study suggests dysregulation of cardiac gene expression and
metabolism as key elements of ERBB2 signaling that could potentially be early
biomarkers of cardiotoxicity.

DOI: 10.1186/s40169-016-0133-2 
PMCID: PMC5243239
PMID: 28101782 


1. IEEE Trans Nanobioscience. 2017 Jan;16(1):51-59. doi: 10.1109/TNB.2017.2649560.
Epub 2017 Jan 9.

Discovery of microRNAs and Transcription Factors Co-Regulatory Modules by
Integrating Multiple Types of Genomic Data.

Luo J, Xiang G, Pan C.

It is well known that regulators known as microRNA (miRNA) and transcription
factor (TF) have been found to play an important role in gene regulation.
However, there are few researches of collaborative regulatory (co-regulatory)
mechanism between miRNA and TF on system level (function level). Meanwhile,
recent advances in high-throughput genomic technologies have enabled researchers 
to collect diverse large-scale genomic data, which can be used to study the
co-regulatory mechanism between miRNA and TF. In this paper, we propose a novel
method called Sparse Network regularized non-negative matrix factorization for
co-regulatory modules identification which adopts multiple non-negative matrix
factorization framework to identify co-regulatory modules including miRNAs, TFs
and genes. This method jointly integrates miRNA, TF and gene expression profiles,
and additional priori networks were added in a regularized manner. In addition,
to avoid the sparsity of these networks, we employ the sparsity penalties to the 
variables to achieve modular solutions. The mathematical formulation can be
effectively solved by an iterative multiplicative updating algorithm. We apply
this method to multiple genomic data including the expression profiles of miRNAs,
TFs and genes on breast cancer obtained from TCGA, priori miRNA-gene regulations,
TF-gene regulations and gene-gene interactions. The results show that the miRNAs,
TFs and genes of the co-regulatory modules are significantly associated and
modules have a reasonable size distribution. Furthermore, the co-regulatory
modules are significantly enriched in Gene Ontology biological processes and
Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes pathways, respectively.

DOI: 10.1109/TNB.2017.2649560 
PMID: 28092569 


1. Mol Med Rep. 2017 Mar;15(3):1087-1094. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2017.6101. Epub 2017 Jan 
4.

Integrated analysis of differentially expressed genes and pathways in
triple‑negative breast cancer.

Peng C(1), Ma W(1), Xia W(2), Zheng W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetic Engineering, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou,
Guangdong 510515, P.R. China. (2)Department of Clinical Laboratory, 421 Hospital 
of PLA, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510318, P.R. China.

Triple‑negative breast cancer (TNBC) is a heterogeneous disease characterized by 
an aggressive phenotype and reduced survival. The aim of the present study was to
investigate the molecular mechanisms involved in the carcinogenesis of TNBC and
to identify novel target molecules for therapy. The differentially expressed
genes (DEGs) in TNBC and normal adjacent tissue were assessed by analyzing the
GSE41970 microarray data using Qlucore Omics Explorer, Gene Ontology (GO) and
Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes. Pathway enrichment analyses for DEGs
were performed using the Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated
Discovery online resource. A protein‑protein interaction (PPI) network was
constructed using Search Tool for the Retrieval of Interacting Genes, and
subnetworks were analyzed by ClusterONE. The PPI network and subnetworks were
visualized using Cytoscape software. A total of 121 DEGs were obtained, of which 
101 were upregulated and 20 were downregulated. The upregulated DEGs were
significantly enriched in 14 pathways and 83 GO biological processes, while the
downregulated DEGs were significantly enriched in 18 GO biological processes. The
PPI network with 118 nodes and 1,264 edges was constructed and three subnetworks 
were extracted from the entire network. The significant hub DEGs with high
degrees were identified, including TP53, glyceraldehyde‑3‑phosphate
dehydrogenase, cyclin D1, HRAS and proliferating cell nuclear antigen, which were
predominantly enriched in the cell cycle pathway and pathways in cancer. A number
of critical genes and pathways were revealed to be associated with TNBC. The
present study may provide an improved understanding of the pathogenesis of TNBC
and contribute to the development of therapeutic targets for TNBC.

DOI: 10.3892/mmr.2017.6101 
PMID: 28075450 


1. Carcinogenesis. 2017 Jan 9. pii: bgw209. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgw209. [Epub ahead 
of print]

Genes involved in development and differentiation are commonly methylated in
cancers derived from multiple organs: A single-institutional methylome analysis
using 1007 tissue specimens.

Ohara K(1), Arai E(2,)(3), Takahashi Y(4), Ito N(1), Shibuya A(3), Tsuta K(5),
Kushima R(5), Tsuda H(5,)(6), Ojima H(3), Fujimoto H(7), Watanabe SI(8), Katai
H(9), Kinoshita T(10), Shibata T(11,)(12), Kohno T(13), Kanai Y(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo 160-8582,
Japan. (2)Department of Pathology, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo
160-8582, Japan earai@keio.jp. (3)Division of Molecular Pathology, National
Cancer Center Research Institute, Tokyo 104-0045, Japan. (4)Biomedical
Department, Solution Center, Mitsui Knowledge Industry Co., Ltd., Tokyo 105-6215,
Japan. (5)Department of Pathology and Clinical Laboratories, Pathology Division, 
National Cancer Center Hospital, Tokyo 104-0045, Japan. (6)Department of Basic
Pathology, National Defense Medical College, Saitama 359-0042, Japan.
(7)Department of Urology. (8)Department of Thoracic Surgery. (9)Department of
Gastric Surgery and Department of Breast Surgery, National Cancer Center
Hospital, Tokyo 104-0045, Japan. (10)Department of Breast Surgery, National
Cancer Center Hospital, Tokyo 104-0045, Japan. (11)Division of Cancer Genomics,
National Cancer Center Research Institute, Tokyo 104-0045, Japan. (12)Laboratory 
of Molecular Medicine, Human Genome Center, The Institute of Medical Science, The
University of Tokyo, Tokyo 108-0071, Japan. (13)Division of Genome Biology,
National Cancer Center Research Institute, Tokyo 104-0045, Japan.

The aim of this study was to clarify the significance of DNA methylation
alterations shared by cancers derived from multiple organs. We analyzed
single-institutional methylome data by single-CpG-resolution Infinium assay for
1,007 samples of non-cancerous tissue (N) and corresponding cancerous tissue (T) 
obtained from lung, stomach, kidney, breast and liver. Principal component
analysis revealed that N samples of each organ showed distinct DNA methylation
profiles, DNA methylation profiles of N samples of each organ being inherited by 
the corresponding T samples and DNA methylation profiles of T samples being more 
similar to those of N samples in the same organ than those of T samples in other 
organs. In contrast to such organ and/or carcinogenetic factor-specificity of DNA
methylation profiles, when compared to the corresponding N samples, 231 genes
commonly showed DNA hypermethylation in T samples in four or more organs. Gene
ontology enrichment analysis showed that such commonly methylated genes were
enriched among "transcriptional factors" participating in development and/or
differentiation, which reportedly show bivalent histone modification in embryonic
stem cells. Pyrosequencing and quantitative reverse transcription-PCR revealed an
inverse correlation between DNA methylation levels and mRNA expression levels of 
representative commonly methylated genes, such as ALX1, ATP8A2, CR1 and EFCAB1,
in tissue samples. These data suggest that disruption of the differentiated state
of precancerous cells via alterations of expression, independent of differences
in organs and/or carcinogenetic factors, may be a common feature of DNA
methylation alterations during carcinogenesis in multiple organs.

© The Author 2017. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/carcin/bgw209 
PMID: 28069692 


1. Int J Biol Macromol. 2017 Mar;96:421-428. doi: 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2016.12.030.
Epub 2016 Dec 13.

Novel interacting proteins identified by tandem affinity purification coupled to 
nano LC-MS/MS interact with ribosomal S6 protein kinase 4 (RSK4) and its variant 
protein (RSK4m).

Liu R(1), Liu T(2), Wei W(3), Guo K(4), Yang N(3), Tian S(3), Zhu J(3), Liu Y(4),
Zhou W(3), Yang H(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Breast Surgery, The Affiliated Tumor Hospital of Guangxi Medical
University, Nanning, Guangxi 530021, China. Electronic address:
liuriqiang@whu.edu.cn. (2)Cancer Research Center, Institute of Biomedical
Science, Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, China. Electronic address:
liuth1990@163.com. (3)Department of Breast Surgery, The Affiliated Tumor Hospital
of Guangxi Medical University, Nanning, Guangxi 530021, China. (4)Cancer Research
Center, Institute of Biomedical Science, Fudan University, Shanghai 200032,
China. (5)Department of Breast Surgery, The Affiliated Tumor Hospital of Guangxi 
Medical University, Nanning, Guangxi 530021, China. Electronic address:
lordyhw@Hotmail.com.

Ribosomal S6 protein kinase 4 (RSK4) is an important novel tumor suppressor that 
inhibits breast cancer cell growth and induces senescence. However, RSK4m, which 
is a variant of RSK4 resulting from alternative splicing, may play distinct roles
in some aspects. Knowledge about the mechanisms of RSK4 or RSK4m activity has
been lacking. Analysis of the RSK4 and RSK4m interactome could provide insight
into their specific functions and integrative mechanisms. Using tandem affinity
purification, we obtained protein complexes that interacted with RSK4 or RSK4m.
Mass spectrum analysis was performed to identify the obtained protein complexes, 
and bioinformatics analysis was performed. In this study, we isolated and
identified 82 RSK4-associated proteins and 137 RSK4m-associated proteins using
two STREP II and a single Flag tag-based tandem affinity purification (SF-TAP)
coupled with nano LC-MS/MS in MDA-MB-231 cells. Gene Ontology and Ingenuity
Pathway Analysis analyses provided functional annotations and protein-protein
interaction networks of the protein interactome of RSK4 and RSK4m. Functional
annotations of these proteins by bioinformatics analyses highlight the essential 
role of RSK4 and RSK4m in coordination with their interacting partners to mediate
multiple biological processes, especially cell senescence. Moreover, after
comparing the interactome of RSK4 and RSK4m, we found that RSK4m is involved in
more molecular functions than RSK4.

Copyright © 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2016.12.030 
PMID: 27986634 


1. J Exp Clin Cancer Res. 2016 Dec 1;35(1):186.

Exosomes play an important role in the process of psoralen reverse multidrug
resistance of breast cancer.

Wang X(1), Xu C(1), Hua Y(1), Sun L(2), Cheng K(1), Jia Z(1), Han Y(1), Dong
J(1), Cui Y(1), Yang Z(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thyroid and Breast Surgery, The Affiliated Hospital of Binzhou
Medical University, 522 Yellow Three Road, Binzhou, Shandong, 256603, People's
Republic of China. (2)Department of Nneurosurgery, The Affiliated Hospital of
Binzhou Medical University, Binzhou, Shandong, 256603, People's Republic of
China. (3)Department of Thyroid and Breast Surgery, The Affiliated Hospital of
Binzhou Medical University, 522 Yellow Three Road, Binzhou, Shandong, 256603,
People's Republic of China. ikb0607@163.com.

BACKGROUND: Release of exosomes have been shown to play critical roles in drug
resistance by delivering cargo. Targeting the transfer of exosomes from resistant
cells to sensitive cells may be an approach to overcome some cases of drug
resistance.
METHOD: In this study, we investigated the potential role of exosomes in the
process of psoralen reverse multidrug resistance of MCF-7/ADR cells. Exosomes
were isolated by differential centrifugation of culture media from MCF-7/ADR
cells (ADR/exo) and MCF-7 parental cells (S/exo). Exosomes were characterized by 
morphology, exosomal markers and size distribution. The ability of ADR/exo to
transfer multidrug resistance was assessed by MTT and real-time quantitative PCR.
The different formation and secretion of exosomes were detected by
immunofluorescence and transmission electron microscopy. Then we performed
comparative transcriptomic analysis using RNA-Seq technology and real-time
quantitative PCR to better understand the gene expression regulation in exosmes
formation and release after psoralen treatment.
RESULTS: Our data showed that exosomes derived from MCF-7/ADR cells were able to 
promote active sequestration of drugs and could induce a drug resistance
phenotype by transferring drug-resistance-related gene MDR-1 and P-glycoprotein
protein. Psoralen could reduce the formation and secretion of exosomes to
overcome drug resistance. There were 21 differentially expressed genes. Gene
ontology (GO) pathway analysis and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG)
pathway analysis showed that the most significantly expressed genes were linked
to PPAR and P53 signaling pathways which were related to exosomes formation,
secretion and cargo sorting.
CONCLUSIONS: Psoralen can affect the exosomes and induce the reduction of
resistance transmission via exosomes might through PPAR and P53 signaling
pathways, which might provide a novel strategy for breast cancer resistance to
chemotherapy in the future.

DOI: 10.1186/s13046-016-0468-y 
PMCID: PMC5131502
PMID: 27906043 


1. Oncol Lett. 2016 Nov;12(5):3075-3080. Epub 2016 Aug 29.

Analysis of the molecular mechanism of osteosarcoma using a bioinformatics
approach.

Yang J(1), Wang N(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Traumatology Five, Linyi People's Hospital, Linyi, Shandong
276000, P.R. China. (2)Department of Children's Rehabilitation, Linyi People's
Hospital, Linyi, Shandong 276000, P.R. China.

The aim of this study was to explore the underlying molecular mechanism related
to the process and progression of osteosarcoma (OS). The differentially expressed
genes (DEGs) were downloaded from the Gene Expression Omnibus database. The
pathway and gene ontology (GO) enrichment analysis, as well as transcription
factor, tumor-associated gene and tumor suppressor gene analyses were performed
to investigate the functions of DEGs. Next, the protein-protein interaction (PPI)
network was constructed and module analysis was further assessed by cluster
analysis with the overlapping neighborhood expansion (Cluster ONE) cytoscape
plug-in. A total of 359 upregulated and 614 downregulated DEGs were identified to
be differentially expressed between OS samples and normal controls. Pathways
significantly enriched by DEGs included the focal adhesion and chromosome
maintenance pathways. Significant GO terms were cell adhesion, cell cycle and
nucleic acid metabolic processes. The upregulated PPI network was constructed
with 170 nodes and the downregulated PPI network was constructed with 332 nodes. 
Breast-ovarian cancer gene 1 (BRCA1), melanocyte-stimulating hormone 2 (MSH2),
cyclin D1 (CCND1) and integrin α5 (ITGA5) were identified to be hub proteins in
PPI. In conclusion, the dysregulated genes played key roles in the progression of
OS. Cell adhesion is a significant biological process in OS development, and the 
genes BRCA1, MSH2, CCND1 and ITGA5 may be potential targets in the therapy of OS.

DOI: 10.3892/ol.2016.5060 
PMCID: PMC5103902
PMID: 27899966 


1. BMC Cancer. 2016 Nov 22;16(1):911.

Conservation of immune gene signatures in solid tumors and prognostic
implications.

Chifman J(1), Pullikuth A(1), Chou JW(1,)(2), Bedognetti D(3), Miller LD(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Wake Forest School of Medicine, Medical Center
Boulevard, Winston-Salem, 27157, NC, USA. (2)Department of Biostatistical
Sciences, Wake Forest Public Health Sciences, Medical Center Boulevard,
Winston-Salem, 27157, NC, USA. (3)Sidra Medical and Research Center, Doha, Qatar.
(4)Department of Cancer Biology, Wake Forest School of Medicine, Medical Center
Boulevard, Winston-Salem, 27157, NC, USA. ldmiller@wakehealth.edu.

BACKGROUND: Tumor-infiltrating leukocytes can either limit cancer growth or
facilitate its spread. Diagnostic strategies that comprehensively assess the
functional complexity of tumor immune infiltrates could have wide-reaching
clinical value. In previous work we identified distinct immune gene signatures in
breast tumors that reflect the relative abundance of infiltrating immune cells
and exhibited significant associations with patient outcomes. Here we
hypothesized that immune gene signatures agnostic to tumor type can be identified
by de novo discovery of gene clusters enriched for immunological functions and
possessing internal correlation structure conserved across solid tumors from
different anatomic sites.
METHODS: We assembled microarray expression datasets encompassing 5,295 tumors of
the breast, colon, lung, ovarian and prostate. Unsupervised clustering methods
were used to determine number and composition of gene clusters within each
dataset. Immune-enriched gene clusters (signatures) identified by gene ontology
enrichment were analyzed for internal correlation structure and conservation
across tumors then compared against expression profiles of: 1) flow-sorted
leukocytes from peripheral blood and 2) >300 cancer cell lines from solid and
hematologic cancers. Cox regression analysis was used to identify signatures with
significant associations with clinical outcome.
RESULTS: We identified nine distinct immune-enriched gene signatures conserved
across all five tumor types. The signatures differentiated specific leukocyte
lineages with moderate discernment overall, and naturally organized into six
discrete groups indicative of admixed lineages. Moreover, seven of the signatures
exhibit minimal and uncorrelated expression in cancer cell lines, suggesting that
these signatures derive predominantly from infiltrating immune cells. All nine
immune signatures achieved statistically significant associations with patient
prognosis (p<0.05) in one or more tumor types with greatest significance observed
in breast and skin cancers. Several signatures indicative of myeloid lineages
exhibited poor outcome associations that were most apparent in brain and colon
cancers.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that tumor infiltrating immune cells can be
differentiated by immune-specific gene expression patterns that quantify the
relative abundance of multiple immune infiltrates across a range of solid tumor
types. That these markers of immune involvement are significantly associated with
patient prognosis in diverse cancers suggests their clinical utility as
pan-cancer markers of tumor behavior and immune responsiveness.

DOI: 10.1186/s12885-016-2948-z 
PMCID: PMC5118876
PMID: 27871313 


1. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2017 Jan;16(1):121-134. doi: 10.1074/mcp.M116.060301. Epub
2016 Nov 11.

Proteome Profiling Outperforms Transcriptome Profiling for Coexpression Based
Gene Function Prediction.

Wang J(1,)(2,)(3), Ma Z(1), Carr SA(4), Mertins P(4), Zhang H(5), Zhang Z(5),
Chan DW(5), Ellis MJ(2,)(6), Townsend RR(7), Smith RD(8), McDermott JE(8), Chen
X(9), Paulovich AG(10), Boja ES(11), Mesri M(11), Kinsinger CR(11), Rodriguez
H(11), Rodland KD(8), Liebler DC(12,)(13), Zhang B(14,)(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)From the ‡Department of Biomedical Informatics, Vanderbilt University Medical 
Center, Nashville, Tennessee 37232. (2)§Lester and Sue Smith Breast Center,
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030. (3)¶Department of Molecular and
Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030. (4)‖Broad
Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142. (5)**Department of 
Pathology, Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore, Maryland 21205.
(6)‡‡Department of Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030.
(7)§§Department of Internal Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine,
St. Louis, Missouri 63110. (8)¶¶Biological Sciences Division, Pacific Northwest
National Laboratory, Richland, Washington 99352. (9)‖‖University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill, 130 Mason Farm Road, Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599. 
(10)Clinical Research Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, 1100
Eastlake Avenue East, Seattle, Washington 98109. (11)Office of Cancer Clinical
Proteomics Research, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland 20892.
(12)Department of Biochemistry, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee
37232. (13)Jim Ayers Institute for Precancer Detection and Diagnosis,
Vanderbilt-Ingram Cancer Center, Nashville, Tennessee 37232. (14)From the
‡Department of Biomedical Informatics, Vanderbilt University Medical Center,
Nashville, Tennessee 37232; bing.zhang@vanderbilt.edu.

Coexpression of mRNAs under multiple conditions is commonly used to infer
cofunctionality of their gene products despite well-known limitations of this
"guilt-by-association" (GBA) approach. Recent advancements in mass
spectrometry-based proteomic technologies have enabled global expression
profiling at the protein level; however, whether proteome profiling data can
outperform transcriptome profiling data for coexpression based gene function
prediction has not been systematically investigated. Here, we address this
question by constructing and analyzing mRNA and protein coexpression networks for
three cancer types with matched mRNA and protein profiling data from The Cancer
Genome Atlas (TCGA) and the Clinical Proteomic Tumor Analysis Consortium (CPTAC).
Our analyses revealed a marked difference in wiring between the mRNA and protein 
coexpression networks. Whereas protein coexpression was driven primarily by
functional similarity between coexpressed genes, mRNA coexpression was driven by 
both cofunction and chromosomal colocalization of the genes. Functionally
coherent mRNA modules were more likely to have their edges preserved in
corresponding protein networks than functionally incoherent mRNA modules.
Proteomic data strengthened the link between gene expression and function for at 
least 75% of Gene Ontology (GO) biological processes and 90% of KEGG pathways. A 
web application Gene2Net (http://cptac.gene2net.org) developed based on the three
protein coexpression networks revealed novel gene-function relationships, such as
linking ERBB2 (HER2) to lipid biosynthetic process in breast cancer, identifying 
PLG as a new gene involved in complement activation, and identifying AEBP1 as a
new epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) marker. Our results demonstrate that 
proteome profiling outperforms transcriptome profiling for coexpression based
gene function prediction. Proteomics should be integrated if not preferred in
gene function and human disease studies.

© 2017 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/mcp.M116.060301 
PMCID: PMC5217778
PMID: 27836980 


1. Gynecol Endocrinol. 2017 Mar;33(3):193-198. doi: 10.1080/09513590.2016.1239253.
Epub 2016 Nov 4.

Identification of upstream transcription factors (TFs) for expression signature
genes in breast cancer.

Zang H(1), Li N(2), Pan Y(2), Hao J(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Breast Surgery , Yantaishan Hospital , Yantai , China and.
(2)b Department of Human Anatomy , School of Basic Medicine, Shandong University 
of Traditional Chinese Medicine , Jinan , China.

Breast cancer is a common malignancy among women with a rising incidence. Our
intention was to detect transcription factors (TFs) for deeper understanding of
the underlying mechanisms of breast cancer. Integrated analysis of gene
expression datasets of breast cancer was performed. Then, functional annotation
of differentially expressed genes (DEGs) was conducted, including Gene Ontology
(GO) enrichment and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway
enrichment. Furthermore, TFs were identified and a global transcriptional
regulatory network was constructed. Seven publically available GEO datasets were 
obtained, and a set of 1196 DEGs were identified (460 up-regulated and 736
down-regulated). Functional annotation results showed that cell cycle was the
most significantly enriched pathway, which was consistent with the fact that cell
cycle is closely related to various tumors. Fifty-three differentially expressed 
TFs were identified, and the regulatory networks consisted of 817 TF-target
interactions between 46 TFs and 602 DEGs in the context of breast cancer. Top 10 
TFs covering the most downstream DEGs were SOX10, NFATC2, ZNF354C, ARID3A, BRCA1,
FOXO3, GATA3, ZEB1, HOXA5 and EGR1. The transcriptional regulatory networks could
enable a better understanding of regulatory mechanisms of breast cancer pathology
and provide an opportunity for the development of potential therapy.

DOI: 10.1080/09513590.2016.1239253 
PMID: 27809618 


1. Oncotarget. 2016 Dec 20;7(51):84439-84452. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.12992.

Ammonium tetrathiomolybdate treatment targets the copper transporter ATP7A and
enhances sensitivity of breast cancer to cisplatin.

Chisholm CL(1), Wang H(2), Wong AH(2), Vazquez-Ortiz G(1), Chen W(3), Xu X(2),
Deng CX(2,)(1).

Author information: 
(1)Genetics of Development and Disease Branch, National Institute of Diabetes,
Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 
MD, USA. (2)Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Macau, Macau SAR, China.
(3)Genomics Core Facility, National Institute of Diabetes, Digestive and Kidney
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland MD, USA.

Cisplatin is an effective breast cancer drug but resistance often develops over
prolonged chemotherapy. Therefore, we performed a candidate approach RNAi screen 
in combination with cisplatin treatment to identify molecular pathways conferring
survival advantages. The screen identified ATP7A as a therapeutic target. ATP7A
is a copper ATPase transporter responsible for intercellular movement and
sequestering of cisplatin. Pharmaceutical replacement for ATP7A by ammonium
tetrathiomolybdate (TM) enhanced cisplatin treatment in breast cancer cells.
Allograft and xenograft models in athymic nude mice treated with cisplatin/TM
exhibited retarded tumor growth, reduced accumulation of cancer stem cells and
decreased cell proliferation as compared to mono-treatment with cisplatin or TM. 
Cisplatin/TM treatment of cisplatin-resistant tumors reduced ATP7A protein
levels, attenuated cisplatin sequestering by ATP7A, increased nuclear
availability of cisplatin, and subsequently enhanced DNA damage and apoptosis.
Microarray analysis of gene ontology pathways that responded uniquely to
cisplatin/TM double treatment depicted changes in cell cycle regulation,
specifically in the G1/S transition. These findings offer the potential to combat
platinum-resistant tumors and sensitize patients to conventional breast cancer
treatment by identifying and targeting the resistant tumors' unique molecular
adaptations.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.12992 
PMCID: PMC5341295
PMID: 27806319 


1. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2016 Nov;80:173-178. doi: 10.1016/j.biocel.2016.10.004. 
Epub 2016 Oct 5.

Activation of the pro-migratory bone morphogenetic protein receptor 1B gene in
human MDA-MB-468 triple-negative breast cancer cells that over-express CYP2J2.

Allison SE(1), Chen Y(2), Petrovic N(3), Zimmermann S(1), Moosmann B(1), Jansch
M(1), Cui PH(1), Dunstan CR(2), Mackenzie PI(4), Murray M(5).

Author information: 
(1)Pharmacogenomics and Drug Development Group, Discipline of Pharmacology,
School of Medical Sciences, Sydney Medical School, University of Sydney, NSW
2006, Australia. (2)School of Aerospace, Mechanical and Mechatronic Engineering, 
University of Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia. (3)School of Pharmacy and Medical
Sciences, University of South Australia, GPO Box 2471, Adelaide, SA 5001,
Australia. (4)Clinical Pharmacology, Flinders University of South Australia,
Bedford Park, SA 5042, Australia. (5)Pharmacogenomics and Drug Development Group,
Discipline of Pharmacology, School of Medical Sciences, Sydney Medical School,
University of Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia. Electronic address:
michael.murray@sydney.edu.au.

Secondary metastases are the leading cause of mortality in patients with breast
cancer. Cytochrome P450 (CYP) 2J2 (CYP2J2) is upregulated in many human tumors
and generates epoxyeicosanoids from arachidonic acid that promote tumorigenesis
and metastasis, but at present there is little information on the genes that
mediate these actions. In this study MDA-MB-468 breast cancer cells were stably
transfected with CYP2J2 (MDA-2J2 cells) and Affymetrix microarray profiling was
undertaken. We identified 182 genes that were differentially expressed in MDA-2J2
cells relative to control (MDA-CTL) cells (log[fold of control] ≥2). From gene
ontology pathway analysis bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) receptor 1B (BMPR1B)
emerged as an important upregulated gene in MDA-2J2 cells. Addition of the BMPR1B
ligand BMP2 stimulated the migration of MDA-2J2 cells, but not MDA-CTL cells,
from 3D-matrigel droplets. Migration of MDA-2J2 cells was prevented by the BMPR
antagonist dorsomorphin. These findings indicate that over-expression of CYP2J2
in MDA-MB-468-derived breast cancer cells activates BMPR1B expression that may
contribute to increased migration. Targeting BMPR1B may be a novel approach to
inhibit the metastatic activity of breast cancers that contain high levels of
CYP2J2.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biocel.2016.10.004 
PMID: 27720933 


1. RNA Biol. 2017 Jan 2;14(1):58-72. doi: 10.1080/15476286.2016.1249092. Epub 2016
Oct 28.

Two distinct extracellular RNA signatures released by a single cell type
identified by microarray and next-generation sequencing.

Lässer C(1), Shelke GV(1), Yeri A(2), Kim DK(3), Crescitelli R(1), Raimondo
S(1,)(4), Sjöstrand M(1), Gho YS(3), Van Keuren Jensen K(2), Lötvall J(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Krefting Research Center, Department of Internal Medicine and Clinical
Nutrition , University of Gothenburg , Gothenburg , Sweden. (2)b Neurogenomics,
TGen , Phoenix , AZ , USA. (3)c Department of Life Sciences , Pohang University
of Science and Technology , Pohang , Gyeongbuk , Republic of Korea. (4)d
Department of Biopathology, and Medical Biotechnologies , Section of Biology and 
Genetics, Università di Palermo , Palermo , Italy.

Cells secrete extracellular RNA (exRNA) to their surrounding environment and
exRNA has been found in many body fluids such as blood, breast milk and
cerebrospinal fluid. However, there are conflicting results regarding the nature 
of exRNA. Here, we have separated 2 distinct exRNA profiles released by mast
cells, here termed high-density (HD) and low-density (LD) exRNA. The exRNA in
both fractions was characterized by microarray and next-generation sequencing.
Both exRNA fractions contained mRNA and miRNA, and the mRNAs in the LD exRNA
correlated closely with the cellular mRNA, whereas the HD mRNA did not.
Furthermore, the HD exRNA was enriched in lincRNA, antisense RNA, vault RNA,
snoRNA, and snRNA with little or no evidence of full-length 18S and 28S rRNA. The
LD exRNA was enriched in mitochondrial rRNA, mitochondrial tRNA, tRNA, piRNA, Y
RNA, and full-length 18S and 28S rRNA. The proteomes of the HD and LD
exRNA-containing fractions were determined with LC-MS/MS and analyzed with Gene
Ontology term finder, which showed that both proteomes were associated with the
term extracellular vesicles and electron microscopy suggests that at least a part
of the exRNA is associated with exosome-like extracellular vesicles.
Additionally, the proteins in the HD fractions tended to be associated with the
nucleus and ribosomes, whereas the LD fraction proteome tended to be associated
with the mitochondrion. We show that the 2 exRNA signatures released by a single 
cell type can be separated by floatation on a density gradient. These results
show that cells can release multiple types of exRNA with substantial differences 
in RNA species content. This is important for any future studies determining the 
nature and function of exRNA released from different cells under different
conditions.

DOI: 10.1080/15476286.2016.1249092 
PMCID: PMC5270547
PMID: 27791479 


1. Oncotarget. 2016 Jun 21;7(25):37944-37956. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.9272.

Piwi-interacting RNAs and PIWI genes as novel prognostic markers for breast
cancer.

Krishnan P(1), Ghosh S(2,)(3), Graham K(2,)(3), Mackey JR(2,)(3), Kovalchuk O(4),
Damaraju S(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, University of Alberta,
Edmonton, Alberta, Canada. (2)Department of Oncology, University of Alberta,
Edmonton, Alberta, Canada. (3)Cross Cancer Institute, Alberta Health Services,
Edmonton, Alberta, Canada. (4)Department of Biological Sciences, University of
Lethbridge, Lethbridge, Alberta, Canada.

Piwi-interacting RNAs (piRNAs), whose role in germline maintenance has been
established, are now also being classified as post-transcriptional regulators of 
gene expression in somatic cells. PIWI proteins, central to piRNA biogenesis,
have been identified as genetic and epigenetic regulators of gene expression.
piRNAs/PIWIs have emerged as potential biomarkers for cancer but their relevance 
to breast cancer has not been comprehensively studied. piRNAs and mRNAs were
profiled from normal and breast tumor tissues using next generation sequencing
and Agilent platforms, respectively. Gene targets for differentially expressed
piRNAs were identified from mRNA expression dataset. piRNAs and PIWI genes were
independently assessed for their prognostic significance (outcomes: Overall
Survival, OS and Recurrence Free Survival, RFS). We discovered eight piRNAs as
novel independent prognostic markers and their association with OS was confirmed 
in an external dataset (The Cancer Genome Atlas). Further, PIWIL3 and PIWIL4
genes showed prognostic relevance. 306 gene targets exhibited reciprocal
relationship with piRNA expression. Cancer cell pathways such as apoptosis and
cell signaling were the key Gene Ontology terms associated with the regulated
gene targets. Overall, we have captured the entire cascade of events in a
dysregulated piRNA pathway and have identified novel markers for breast cancer
prognostication.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.9272 
PMCID: PMC5122362
PMID: 27177224 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that that they have no
conflict of interest.


1. Oncol Rep. 2016 Dec;36(6):3405-3412. doi: 10.3892/or.2016.5173. Epub 2016 Oct 14.

Distinct expression profile of lncRNA in endometrial carcinoma.

Xu J(1), Qian Y(1), Ye M(2), Fu Z(3), Jia X(1), Li W(1), Xu P(3), Lv M(2), Huang 
L(4), Wang L(2), Ruan H(1), Lv J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Affiliated Obstetrics and Gynecology 
Hospital, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 210004, P.R. China. (2)Department
of Breast Surgery, Affiliated Obstetrics and Gynecology Hospital, Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing 210004, P.R. China. (3)Nanjing Maternity and Child Health
Medical Institute, Affiliated Obstetrics and Gynecology Hospital, Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing 210004, P.R. China. (4)First Affiliated Hospital, Nanjing
Medical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210029, P.R. China.

Endometrial carcinoma (EC) is the most common malignancy in women. Dispite its
prevalence, the prognosis of endometrial carcinoma still relies on conventional
histological type, grade and invasion information. Its morbidity is still
increasing and the outcome is very poor. To the best of our knowledge, hormonal
imbalance and/or molecular genetic alterations are the main cause of EC. However,
the alterations of lncRNAs which accounts for approximately 4/5 of human
transcripts are still poorly understood. In the present study, using the
RiboArray™ Custom Array, we studied the expression profiles of lncRNA in EC as
compared to normal endometrium (NE) to find potential core lncRNAs for the
diagnosis of EC. We found the potential core lncRNA by GO, KEGG, lncRNA and mRNA 
co-expression network. The potential functional lncRNAs were further detected by 
qPCR to validate the microarray results. A total of 172 lncRNAs and 188 mRNAs
were found to be differentially expressed between type Ⅰ EC and the NE samples
(fold change >1.5). qPCR validation showed good consistency with the microarray
data. GO, pathway analysis, the lncRNA and mRNA co-expression network as well as 
the TCGA data revealed that 6 lncRNAs (KIAA0087, RP11-501O2, FAM212B-AS1,
LOC102723552, RP11-140I24 and RP11-600K151) may be the core regulators of
endometrial carcinogenesis. The potential core lncRNAs revealed by the mRNA and
lncRNA co-expression network might be helpful to explore potential early
diagnostic and therapeutic targets for EC.

DOI: 10.3892/or.2016.5173 
PMID: 27748922  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Oncol Rep. 2016 Dec;36(6):3197-3206. doi: 10.3892/or.2016.5153. Epub 2016 Oct 7.

MicroRNA profiling in human breast cancer cell lines exposed to the
anti-neoplastic drug cediranib.

Bordinhão AL(1), Evangelista AF(1), Oliveira RJ(1), Macedo T(1), Silveira HC(1), 
Reis RM(1), Marques MM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Research Center, Barretos Cancer Hospital, Barretos, São
Paulo, Brazil.

Cediranib, a pan-tyrosine kinase inhibitor is showing promising results for the
treatment of several solid tumours. In breast cancer, its effects remain unclear,
and there are no predictive biomarkers. Several studies have examined the
expression profiles of microRNAs (miRNAs) in response to different chemotherapy
treatments and found that the expression patterns may be associated with the
treatment response. Therefore, our aim was to evaluate the cellular behaviour and
differential expression profiles of miRNAs in breast cancer cell lines exposed to
cediranib. The biological effect of this drug was measured by viability,
migration, invasion and cell death in in vitro assays. Signaling pathways were
assessed using a human phospho-receptor tyrosine kinase array. Furthermore, using
a miRNA array and quantitative real-time PCR (qRT‑PCR), we assessed the relative 
expression of miRNAs following cediranib treatment. The breast cancer cell lines 
exhibited a distinct cytotoxic response to cediranib treatment. Cediranib
exposure resulted in a decrease in the cell migration and invasion of all the
breast cancer cell lines. Treatment with cediranib appeared to be able to
modulate the activation of several RTKs that are targets of cediranib such as
EGFR and a new potential target ROR2. Furthermore, this drug was able to modulate
the expression profile of different microRNAs such as miR-494, miR-923, miR-449a,
miR-449b and miR-886-3 in breast cancer cell lines. These miRNAs are reported to 
regulate genes involved in important molecular processes, according to
bioinformatics prediction tools.

DOI: 10.3892/or.2016.5153 
PMID: 27748845  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Comput Biol Med. 2016 Dec 1;79:10-20. doi: 10.1016/j.compbiomed.2016.09.017. Epub
2016 Sep 24.

Improving information retrieval in functional analysis.

Rodriguez JC(1), González GA(2), Fresno C(3), Llera AS(4), Fernández EA(5).

Author information: 
(1)UA AREA CS. AGR. ING. BIO. Y S, Universidad Católica de Córdoba, CONICET,
Córdoba, Argentina; Facultad de Matemática, Astronomía y Física, Universidad
Nacional de Córdoba, Córdoba, Argentina. (2)UA AREA CS. AGR. ING. BIO. Y S,
Universidad Católica de Córdoba, CONICET, Córdoba, Argentina; Instituto Nacional 
de Cáncer, MinSal, Córdoba, Agentina. (3)UA AREA CS. AGR. ING. BIO. Y S,
Universidad Católica de Córdoba, CONICET, Córdoba, Argentina. (4)IIBBA, Fund.
Instituto Leloir, CONICET, Buenos Aires, Argentina. (5)UA AREA CS. AGR. ING. BIO.
Y S, Universidad Católica de Córdoba, CONICET, Córdoba, Argentina; Facultad de
Ciencias Exactas, Físicas y Naturales, Universidad Nacional de Córdoba, Córdoba, 
Argentina. Electronic address: efernandez@bdmg.com.ar.

Transcriptome analysis is essential to understand the mechanisms regulating key
biological processes and functions. The first step usually consists of
identifying candidate genes; to find out which pathways are affected by those
genes, however, functional analysis (FA) is mandatory. The most frequently used
strategies for this purpose are Gene Set and Singular Enrichment Analysis (GSEA
and SEA) over Gene Ontology. Several statistical methods have been developed and 
compared in terms of computational efficiency and/or statistical appropriateness.
However, whether their results are similar or complementary, the sensitivity to
parameter settings, or possible bias in the analyzed terms has not been addressed
so far. Here, two GSEA and four SEA methods and their parameter combinations were
evaluated in six datasets by comparing two breast cancer subtypes with well-known
differences in genetic background and patient outcomes. We show that GSEA and SEA
lead to different results depending on the chosen statistic, model and/or
parameters. Both approaches provide complementary results from a biological
perspective. Hence, an Integrative Functional Analysis (IFA) tool is proposed to 
improve information retrieval in FA. It provides a common gene expression
analytic framework that grants a comprehensive and coherent analysis. Only a
minimal user parameter setting is required, since the best SEA/GSEA alternatives 
are integrated. IFA utility was demonstrated by evaluating four prostate cancer
and the TCGA breast cancer microarray datasets, which showed its biological
generalization capabilities.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.compbiomed.2016.09.017 
PMID: 27723507 


1. Gene. 2017 Jan 5;596:45-52. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2016.10.005. Epub 2016 Oct 6.

Differentially expressed mitochondrial genes in breast cancer cells: Potential
new targets for anti-cancer therapies.

Zhang Q(1), Liang Z(2), Gao Y(1), Teng M(1), Niu L(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, University of Science and Technology of China, 96
Jinzhai Road, Hefei, Anhui 230026, China; Key Laboratory of Structural Biology,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, 96 Jinzhai Road, Hefei, Anhui 230026, China.
(2)School of Life Sciences, University of Science and Technology of China, 96
Jinzhai Road, Hefei, Anhui 230026, China; Key Laboratory of Structural Biology,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, 96 Jinzhai Road, Hefei, Anhui 230026, China.
Electronic address: liangzhi@ustc.edu.cn.

It has been reported that tumor growth and proliferation correspond to
mitochondrial dysfunction and that the tumor cellular microenvironment plays a
key role in tumor progression, representing an area that might be manipulated to 
confer therapeutic anti-tumor benefits. In this article, we have identified
mitochondrial genes, largely nuclear-encoded genes, which are differentially
expressed in breast cancer epithelial and stromal cells compared to cells from
normal breast tissues. We determined that gene expression of the mitochondrial
membrane respiratory chain complex I and IV and ATP synthesis were reduced in
both in epithelial and stromal cancer cells compared to normal breast cells. We
also found transport-related genes were significantly more highly expressed in
breast cancer epithelial cells. Our data also suggest that mitochondria are
likely to proliferate in breast cancer stromal cells, which is supported by the
observation that MRPL12, POLG, and RNASEH1 are all up-regulated in cancerous
stromal cells. In addition, we present an improved simulated annealing algorithm,
SANetWalker, which can be used to detect the functional module. At the same time,
this method has a minimal effect on network topology and can be used to identify 
the highest confidence functional module. Using SANetWalker, we obtained the
highest confidence (90%) functional module with a fumarate hydratase
(FH)-centered network with 40 nodes and 107 edges. Functional analysis revealed
that glutamine metabolism genes were significantly up-regulated in both
epithelial and stromal cells from breast cancer tissues, which implicates
glutamine metabolism in breast cancer growth and metastasis.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gene.2016.10.005 
PMID: 27720940  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Pathol Oncol Res. 2016 Sep 21. [Epub ahead of print]

Combined Analysis of ChIP Sequencing and Gene Expression Dataset in Breast
Cancer.

Liu P(1), Jiang W(2), Zhou S(1), Gao J(3), Zhang H(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Lymphoma, Sino-US Center of Lymphoma and Leukemia, National
Clinical Research Center for Cancer, Key Laboratory of Cancer Prevention and
Therapy, Tianjin, Tianjin's Clinical Research Center for Cancer, Tianjin Medical 
University Cancer Institute and Hospital, Huan-Hu-Xi Road, Ti-Yuan-Bei, He Xi
District, Tianjin, 300060, China. (2)Department of Radiotherapy, Second Hospital 
of Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin, 300211, China. (3)Department of Oncology,
Hengshui Harrison International Peace Hospital, Hengshui, Hebei, 053000, China.
(4)Department of Lymphoma, Sino-US Center of Lymphoma and Leukemia, National
Clinical Research Center for Cancer, Key Laboratory of Cancer Prevention and
Therapy, Tianjin, Tianjin's Clinical Research Center for Cancer, Tianjin Medical 
University Cancer Institute and Hospital, Huan-Hu-Xi Road, Ti-Yuan-Bei, He Xi
District, Tianjin, 300060, China. snowlpf@163.com.

Breast cancer is a common malignancy in women and contribute largely to the
cancer related death. The purpose of this study is to confirm the roles of GATA3 
and identify potential biomarkers of breast cancer. Chromatin Immunoprecipitation
combined with high-throughput sequencing (ChIP-Seq) (GSM1642515) and gene
expression profiles (GSE24249) were downloaded from the Gene Expression Omnibus
(GEO) database. Bowtie2 and MACS2 were used for the mapping and peak calling of
the ChIP-Seq data respectively. ChIPseeker, a R bioconductor package was adopted 
for the annotation of the enriched peaks. For the gene expression profiles, we
used affy and limma package to do normalization and differential expression
analysis. The genes with fold change >2 and adjusted P-Value <0.05 were screened 
out. Besides, BETA (Binding and Expression Target Analysis) was used to do the
combined analysis of ChIP-Seq and gene expression profiles. The Database for
Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery (DAVID) was used for the
functional enrichment analysis of overlapping genes between the target genes and 
differential expression genes (DEGs). What's more, the protein-protein
interaction (PPI) network of the overlapping genes was obtained through the Human
Protein Reference Database (HPRD). A total of 46,487 peaks were identified for
GATA3 and out of which, 3256 ones were found to located at -3000 ~ 0 bp from the 
transcription start sites (TSS) of their nearby gene. A total of 236 down- and
343 up-regulated genes were screened out in GATA3 overexpression breast cancer
samples compared with those in control. The combined analysis of ChIP-Seq and
gene expression dataset showed GATA3 act as a repressor in breast cancer.
Besides, 68 overlaps were obtained between the DEGs and genes included in peaks
located at -3000 ~ 0 bp from TSS. Gene Ontology (GO) terms and Kyoto Encyclopedia
of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathways related to cancer progression and gene
regulation were found to be enriched in those overlaps. In the PPI network,
NDRG1, JUP and etc. were found to directly interact with large number of genes,
which might indicate their important roles in the progression of breast cancer.

DOI: 10.1007/s12253-016-0116-z 
PMID: 27654269 


1. PLoS One. 2016 Sep 9;11(9):e0162631. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0162631.
eCollection 2016.

Transcriptome Profile Analysis of Breast Muscle Tissues from High or Low Levels
of Atmospheric Ammonia Exposed Broilers (Gallus gallus).

Yi B(1), Chen L(1), Sa R(1), Zhong R(1), Xing H(1), Zhang H(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Animal Nutrition, Institute of Animal Sciences,
Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Beijing, 100193, China.

Atmospheric ammonia is a common problem in poultry industry. High concentrations 
of aerial ammonia cause great harm to broilers' health and production. For the
consideration of human health, the limit exposure concentration of ammonia in
houses is set at 25 ppm. Previous reports have shown that 25 ppm is still
detrimental to livestock, especially the gastrointestinal tract and respiratory
tract, but the negative relationship between ammonia exposure and the tissue of
breast muscle of broilers is still unknown. In the present study, 25 ppm ammonia 
in poultry houses was found to lower slaughter performance and breast yield.
Then, high-throughput RNA sequencing was utilized to identify differentially
expressed genes in breast muscle of broiler chickens exposed to high (25 ppm) or 
low (3 ppm) levels of atmospheric ammonia. The transcriptome analysis showed that
163 genes (fold change ≥ 2 or ≤ 0.5; P-value < 0.05) were differentially
expressed between Ammonia25 (treatment group) and Ammonia3 (control group),
including 96 down-regulated and 67 up-regulated genes. qRT-PCR analysis validated
the transcriptomic results of RNA sequencing. Gene Ontology (GO) functional
annotation analysis revealed potential genes, processes and pathways with
putative involvement in growth and development inhibition of breast muscle in
broilers caused by aerial ammonia exposure. This study facilitates understanding 
of the genetic architecture of the chicken breast muscle transcriptome, and has
identified candidate genes for breast muscle response to atmospheric ammonia
exposure.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0162631 
PMCID: PMC5017607
PMID: 27611572 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.


1. Genome Med. 2016 Aug 24;8(1):88. doi: 10.1186/s13073-016-0340-x.

Cancer network activity associated with therapeutic response and synergism.

Serra-Musach J(1), Mateo F(1), Capdevila-Busquets E(2), de Garibay GR(1), Zhang
X(3), Guha R(3), Thomas CJ(3), Grueso J(4), Villanueva A(1), Jaeger S(2), Heyn
H(5), Vizoso M(5), Pérez H(5), Cordero A(5), Gonzalez-Suarez E(5), Esteller
M(5,)(6,)(7), Moreno-Bueno G(8,)(9), Tjärnberg A(10), Lázaro C(11), Serra V(4),
Arribas J(7,)(12,)(13), Benson M(10), Gustafsson M(10), Ferrer M(14), Aloy
P(15,)(16), Pujana MÀ(17).

Author information: 
(1)Breast Cancer and Systems Biology Lab, Program Against Cancer Therapeutic
Resistance (ProCURE), Catalan Institute of Oncology (ICO), Bellvitge Institute
for Biomedical Research (IDIBELL), Gran via 199, L'Hospitalet del Llobregat,
Barcelona, 08908, Catalonia, Spain. (2)Joint IRB-BSC-CRG Program in Computational
Biology, Institute for Research in Biomedicine (IRB Barcelona), The Barcelona
Institute of Science and Technology, Baldiri Reixac 10, Barcelona, 08028,
Catalonia, Spain. (3)Division of Preclinical Innovation, National Center for
Advancing Translational Sciences (NCATS), National Institutes of Health, 9800
Medical Center Dr. Rockville, Bethesda, MD, 20850, USA. (4)Experimental
Therapeutics Group, Vall d'Hebron Institute of Oncology (VHIO), Cellex Center,
Natzaret 115-117, Barcelona, 08035, Catalonia, Spain. (5)Cancer Epigenetics and
Biology Program (PEBC), IDIBELL, Gran via 199, L'Hospitalet del Llobregat,
Barcelona, 08908, Catalonia, Spain. (6)Department of Physiological Sciences II,
School of Medicine, University of Barcelona, Feixa Llarga s/n, L'Hospitalet del
Llobregat, Barcelona, 08908, Catalonia, Spain. (7)Catalan Institution for
Research and Advanced Studies (ICREA), Passeig Lluís Companys 23, Barcelona,
08010, Catalonia, Spain. (8)Department of Biochemistry, Autonomous University of 
Madrid (UAM), Biomedical Research Institute "Alberto Sols" (Spanish National
Research Council (CSIC)-UAM), Hospital La Paz Institute for Health Research
(IdiPAZ), Arzobispo Morcillo 4, Madrid, 28029, Spain. (9)MD Anderson
International Foundation, Arturo Soria 270, Madrid, 28033, Spain. (10)The Centre 
for Individualized Medicine, Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine,
Linköping University, Linköping, 58183, Sweden. (11)Hereditary Cancer Program,
ICO, IDIBELL, Gran via 199, L'Hospitalet del Llobregat, Barcelona, 08908,
Catalonia, Spain. (12)Preclinical Research Program, VHIO, Cellex Center, Natzaret
115-117, Barcelona, 08035, Catalonia, Spain. (13)Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, Medical School Building M, Autonomous University of Barcelona,
Bellaterra, 08193, Catalonia, Spain. (14)Division of Preclinical Innovation,
National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences (NCATS), National Institutes
of Health, 9800 Medical Center Dr. Rockville, Bethesda, MD, 20850, USA.
marc.ferrer@nih.gov. (15)Joint IRB-BSC-CRG Program in Computational Biology,
Institute for Research in Biomedicine (IRB Barcelona), The Barcelona Institute of
Science and Technology, Baldiri Reixac 10, Barcelona, 08028, Catalonia, Spain.
paloy@irbbarcelona.org. (16)Catalan Institution for Research and Advanced Studies
(ICREA), Passeig Lluís Companys 23, Barcelona, 08010, Catalonia, Spain.
paloy@irbbarcelona.org. (17)Breast Cancer and Systems Biology Lab, Program
Against Cancer Therapeutic Resistance (ProCURE), Catalan Institute of Oncology
(ICO), Bellvitge Institute for Biomedical Research (IDIBELL), Gran via 199,
L'Hospitalet del Llobregat, Barcelona, 08908, Catalonia, Spain.
mapujana@iconcologia.net.

BACKGROUND: Cancer patients often show no or only modest benefit from a given
therapy. This major problem in oncology is generally attributed to the lack of
specific predictive biomarkers, yet a global measure of cancer cell activity may 
support a comprehensive mechanistic understanding of therapy efficacy. We
reasoned that network analysis of omic data could help to achieve this goal.
METHODS: A measure of "cancer network activity" (CNA) was implemented based on a 
previously defined network feature of communicability. The network nodes and
edges corresponded to human proteins and experimentally identified interactions, 
respectively. The edges were weighted proportionally to the expression of the
genes encoding for the corresponding proteins and relative to the number of
direct interactors. The gene expression data corresponded to the basal conditions
of 595 human cancer cell lines. Therapeutic responses corresponded to the
impairment of cell viability measured by the half maximal inhibitory
concentration (IC50) of 130 drugs approved or under clinical development. Gene
ontology, signaling pathway, and transcription factor-binding annotations were
taken from public repositories. Predicted synergies were assessed by determining 
the viability of four breast cancer cell lines and by applying two different
analytical methods.
RESULTS: The effects of drug classes were associated with CNAs formed by
different cell lines. CNAs also differentiate target families and effector
pathways. Proteins that occupy a central position in the network largely
contribute to CNA. Known key cancer-associated biological processes, signaling
pathways, and master regulators also contribute to CNA. Moreover, the major
cancer drivers frequently mediate CNA and therapeutic differences. Cell-based
assays centered on these differences and using uncorrelated drug effects reveals 
novel synergistic combinations for the treatment of breast cancer dependent on
PI3K-mTOR signaling.
CONCLUSIONS: Cancer therapeutic responses can be predicted on the basis of a
systems-level analysis of molecular interactions and gene expression. Fundamental
cancer processes, pathways, and drivers contribute to this feature, which can
also be exploited to predict precise synergistic drug combinations.

DOI: 10.1186/s13073-016-0340-x 
PMCID: PMC4995628
PMID: 27553366  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2016 Oct 1;308:32-45. doi: 10.1016/j.taap.2016.08.013.
Epub 2016 Aug 15.

Phenotypically anchored transcriptome profiling of developmental exposure to the 
antimicrobial agent, triclosan, reveals hepatotoxicity in embryonic zebrafish.

Haggard DE(1), Noyes PD(2), Waters KM(3), Tanguay RL(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental and Molecular Toxicology, Oregon State University,
Corvallis, OR, United States. (2)Department of Environmental and Molecular
Toxicology, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR, United States; Office of
Science Coordination and Policy (OSCP), Office of Chemical Safety and Pollution
Prevention, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Washington, DC, United States. 
(3)Biological Sciences Division, Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, Richland,
WA, United States. (4)Department of Environmental and Molecular Toxicology,
Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR, United States. Electronic address:
Robert.Tanguay@oregonstate.edu.

Triclosan (TCS) is an antimicrobial agent commonly found in a variety of personal
care products and cosmetics. TCS readily enters the environment through
wastewater and is detected in human plasma, urine, and breast milk due to its
widespread use. Studies have implicated TCS as a disruptor of thyroid and
estrogen signaling; therefore, research examining the developmental effects of
TCS is warranted. In this study, we used embryonic zebrafish to investigate the
developmental toxicity and potential mechanism of action of TCS. Embryos were
exposed to graded concentrations of TCS from 6 to 120hours post-fertilization
(hpf) and the concentration where 80% of the animals had mortality or morbidity
at 120hpf (EC80) was calculated. Transcriptomic profiling was conducted on
embryos exposed to the EC80 (7.37μM). We identified a total of 922 significant
differentially expressed transcripts (FDR adjusted P-value≤0.05; fold change ≥2).
Pathway and gene ontology enrichment analyses identified biological networks and 
transcriptional hubs involving normal liver functioning, suggesting TCS may be
hepatotoxic in zebrafish. Tissue-specific gene enrichment analysis further
supported the role of the liver as a target organ for TCS toxicity. We also
examined the in vitro bioactivity profile of TCS reported by the ToxCast
screening program. TCS had a diverse bioactivity profile and was a hit in 217 of 
the 385 assay endpoints we identified. We observed similarities in gene
expression and hepatic steatosis assays; however, hit data for TCS were more
concordant with the hypothesized CAR/PXR activity of TCS from rodent and human in
vitro studies.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.taap.2016.08.013 
PMCID: PMC5023494 [Available on 2017-10-01]
PMID: 27538710 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to
declare.


1. PLoS One. 2016 Jul 28;11(7):e0159498. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0159498.
eCollection 2016.

An Encapsulation of Gene Signatures for Hepatocellular Carcinoma, MicroRNA-132
Predicted Target Genes and the Corresponding Overlaps.

Zhang X(1), Tang W(2), Chen G(3), Ren F(3), Liang H(3), Dang Y(3), Rong M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Research Department, Affiliated Cancer Hospital, Guangxi Medical University,
71 Hedi Road, Nanning, Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region, P. R. China.
(2)Department of Breast Surgery, Affiliated Cancer Hospital, Guangxi Medical
University, 71 Hedi Road, Nanning, Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region, P. R. China.
(3)Department of Pathology, First Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi Medical
University, 6 Shuangyong Road, Nanning, Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region, P. R.
China.

OBJECTIVES: Previous studies have demonstrated that microRNA-132 plays a vital
part in and is actively associated with several cancers, with its
tumor-suppressive role in hepatocellular carcinoma confirmed. The current study
employed multiple bioinformatics techniques to establish gene signatures for
hepatocellular carcinoma, microRNA-132 predicted target genes and the
corresponding overlaps.
METHODS: Various assays were performed to explore the role and cellular functions
of miR-132 in HCC and a successive panel of tasks was completed, including NLP
analysis, miR-132 target genes prediction, comprehensive analyses (gene ontology 
analysis, pathway analysis, network analysis and connectivity analysis), and
analytical integration. Later, HCC-related and miR-132-related potential targets,
pathways, networks and highlighted hub genes were revealed as well as those of
the overlapped section.
RESULTS: MiR-132 was effective in both impeding cell growth and boosting
apoptosis in HCC cell lines. A total of fifty-nine genes were obtained from the
analytical integration, which were considered to be both HCC- and
miR-132-related. Moreover, four specific pathways were unveiled in the network
analysis of the overlaps, i.e. adherens junction, VEGF signaling pathway,
neurotrophin signaling pathway, and MAPK signaling pathway.
CONCLUSIONS: The tumor-suppressive role of miR-132 in HCC has been further
confirmed by in vitro experiments. Gene signatures in the study identified the
potential molecular mechanisms of HCC, miR-132 and their established
associations, which might be effective for diagnosis, individualized treatments
and prognosis of HCC patients. However, combined detections of miR-132 with other
bio-indicators in clinical practice and further in vitro experiments are needed.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0159498 
PMCID: PMC4965135
PMID: 27467251 


1. J Biomol Struct Dyn. 2016 Aug 10:1-11. doi: 10.1080/07391102.2016.1216894. [Epub 
ahead of print]

Bioinformatics exploration of PAK1 (P21-activated kinase-1) revealed potential
network gene elements in breast invasive carcinoma.

Yellapu NK(1), Pulaganti M(2), Pakala SB(3).

Author information: 
(1)a Biomedical Informatics Centre , Vector Control Research Centre (VCRC)-ICMR ,
Pondicherry 605006 , India. (2)b Multi-Disciplinary Research Unit , Sri
Venkateswara Medical College , Tirupati 517501 , India. (3)c Biology Division ,
Indian Institute of Science Education and Research (IISER) Tirupati , Tirupati
517507 , India.

P21-activated kinase-1 (PAK1) is an enzyme associated with multiple metabolic
networks and different types of cancers. Hence, there is a need to study the
global network map of PAK1 to understand its role and regulatory mechanisms by
means of its significant molecular interactive partners. This will help to
explore its global biological functions in breast cancer. In view of this, we
obtained the gene expression data-sets of PAK1 from The Cancer Genome
Atlas-cBioportal and GeneCards databases and found that 91 PAK1-related genes are
associated with breast cancer. Gene Ontology and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and 
Genomes pathway investigations of 91 genes via Database for Annotation
Visualization and Integrated Discovery bioinformatics resource revealed that,
PAK1 being a major kinase is associated with several metabolic pathways and
involved in phosphorylation, signal transduction, apoptosis, biosynthesis and
majorly cancer-related cell signalling pathways. The PAK1 interaction network
derived from STRING and Cytoscape revealed that the genes
Signal-Transducer-and-Activator-of-Transcription-3 (STAT3), Cyclin-D1 (CCND1),
Mitogen-activated protein kinase-1 (MAPK1), Ras-Homolog-Family-Member-A (RHOA)
and Catenin-beta-1 have high degrees of interaction where CCND1, MAPK1 and RHOA
have direct interaction with PAK1. Finally, the global expression map of PAK1 and
its related genes was derived as topological frame that helped to explore and
investigate PAK1 interactions. Further, the molecular modelling studies of PAK1
with its major interacting partners RHOA and STAT3 helped to explore the key
interactive residues of PAK1 structure. This information can be used to develop
novel therapeutic and control strategies against breast cancer.

DOI: 10.1080/07391102.2016.1216894 
PMID: 27456030 


1. Gene. 2016 Oct 15;591(2):471-7. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2016.07.002. Epub 2016 Jul 2.

Co-expression networks revealed potential core lncRNAs in the triple-negative
breast cancer.

Yang F(1), Liu YH(1), Dong SY(1), Yao ZH(1), Lv L(1), Ma RM(1), Dai XX(1), Wang
J(2), Zhang XH(3), Wang OC(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Oncology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou
Medical University, Wenzhou, Zhejiang, PR China. (2)Eye Hospital, Wenzhou Medical
University, Wenzhou, Zhejiang, PR China. (3)Department of Surgical Oncology, The 
First Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, Zhejiang, PR
China. Electronic address: xiaohuazhang2015@sina.com. (4)Department of Surgical
Oncology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou,
Zhejiang, PR China. Electronic address: woconcology2000@163.com.

Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is an aggressive type of breast cancer with 
unfavorable outcome. It is urgent to explore novel biomarkers and potential
therapeutic targets in this malignancy. Increasing knowledge of long noncoding
RNAs (lncRNAs) significantly deepens our understanding of cancer biology. Here,
we sequenced eight paired TNBC tumor tissues and non-cancerous tissues, and
validated significantly differentially expressed lncRNAs. Gene ontology (GO) and 
pathway analysis were used to investigate the function of differentially
expressed mRNAs. Further, potential core lncRNAs in TNBC were identified by
co-expression networks. Kaplan-Meier analysis also indicated that breast cancer
patients with lower expression level of rhabdomyosarcoma 2 associated transcript 
(RMST), one of the potential core lncRNAs, had worse overall survival. To the
best of our knowledge, it was the first report that RMST was involved in breast
cancer. Our research provided a rich resource to the research community for
further investigating lncRNAs functions and identifying lncRNAs with diagnostic
and therapeutic potentials in TNBC.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gene.2016.07.002 
PMID: 27380926  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Oncol Lett. 2016 Jun;11(6):3999-4007. Epub 2016 May 5.

Identification of key genes in glioblastoma-associated stromal cells using
bioinformatics analysis.

Chen C(1), Sun C(2), Tang D(1), Yang G(1), Zhou X(3), Wang D(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, The Fifth People's Hospital of Jinan, Jinan,
Shandong 250022, P.R. China. (2)Department of Neurosurgery, People's Hospital of 
Huantai, Zibo, Shandong 256400, P.R. China. (3)Department of Neurosurgery, Qilu
Hospital of Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong 250012, P.R. China.

The aim of the present study was to identify key genes and pathways in
glioblastoma-associated stromal cells (GASCs) using bioinformatics. The
expression profile of microarray GSE24100 was obtained from the Gene Expression
Omnibus database, which included the expression profile of 4 GASC samples and 3
control stromal cell samples. Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were
identified using limma software in R language, and Gene Ontology and Kyoto
Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes pathway analysis of DEGs were performed using
the Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery software. In 
addition, a protein-protein interaction (PPI) network was constructed.
Subsequently, a sub-network was constructed to obtain additional information on
genes identified in the PPI network using CFinder software. In total, 502 DEGs
were identified in GASCs, including 331 upregulated genes and 171 downregulated
genes. Cyclin-dependent kinase 1 (CDK1), cyclin A2, mitotic checkpoint
serine/threonine kinase (BUB1), cell division cycle 20 (CDC20), polo-like kinase 
1 (PLK1), and transcription factor breast cancer 1, early onset (BRCA1) were
identified from the PPI network, and sub-networks revealed these genes as hub
genes that were involved in significant pathways, including mitotic, cell cycle
and p53 signaling pathways. In conclusion, CDK1, BUB1, CDC20, PLK1 and BRCA1 may 
be key genes that are involved in significant pathways associated with
glioblastoma. This information may lead to the identification of the mechanism of
glioblastoma tumorigenesis.

DOI: 10.3892/ol.2016.4526 
PMCID: PMC4888085
PMID: 27313730 


1. Int J Oncol. 2016 Aug;49(2):720-34. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2016.3573. Epub 2016 Jun 8.

MicroRNA-205 directly targets Krüppel-like factor 12 and is involved in invasion 
and apoptosis in basal-like breast carcinoma.

Guan B(1), Li Q(2), Shen L(3), Rao Q(4), Wang Y(5), Zhu Y(6), Zhou XJ(4), Li
XH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Shanghai 6th People's Hospital Jinshan Branch,
Shanghai 201599, P.R. China. (2)Department of Pathology, Shanghai Pudong New Area
People's Hospital, Shanghai 201299, P.R. China. (3)Department of Cardiothoracic
Surgery, Shanghai Children's Hospital, Shanghai 201040, P.R. China. (4)Department
of Pathology, Nanjing Jinling Hospital, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210002, P.R. China.
(5)Department of Pathology, The Second Affiliated Hospital with Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210000, P.R. China. (6)Department of Pathology,
Jiangsu Province People's Hospital, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210029, P.R. China.

We investigated microRNAs (miRs) specific to its target gene and exerting
distinct biological functions for basal-like breast carcinoma (BLBC). Total RNA
was extracted and subjected to miR microarray and bioinformatics analysis. Based 
on the comprehensive analysis, expression of miRs including its target was
analyzed by quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction
(qRT-PCR), western blot analysis and immunohistochemistry (IHC). Further
functional analyses were conducted including proliferation, invasion and
apoptosis. miR-205 was identified as downregulated (less than 0.5-fold) in BLBC
relatively to normal control (NC). Gene ontology (GO) analysis suggested miR-205 
may directly targeted Krüppel-like factor 12 (KLF12; degree=4). Luciferase assay 
revealed miR-205 directly targeted KLF12 through binding its 3'-untranslated
region (3'-UTR; p=0.0016). qRT-PCR and western blot analysis showed miR-205
expression was low in cells (p=0.007) and tumor tissues (n=6; p=0.0074), and
KLF12 RNA/protein was observed at high levels in cells (p=0.0026; p=0.0079) and
tumor tissues (n=9; p=0.0083); knock-up of miR-205 increased its expression
(p=0.0021) but reduced KLF12 RNA/protein levels (p=0.0038; p=0.009) in cells.
Modulation of miR-205 expression by transfecting its mimics in cells, was
involved in invasion (p=0.00175) and apoptosis (p=0.006). In conclusion, our
results supported that miR-205 was a miR specific to BLBC which functioned as
tumor suppressor gene through directly targeting and negatively regulating
proto-oncogene KLF12. miR-205 dysregulation was involved in invasion and
apoptosis. miR-205 and KLF12 provided a potential diagnosis biomarker and
therapeutic approach for BLBC.

DOI: 10.3892/ijo.2016.3573 
PMID: 27278159 


1. BioData Min. 2016 May 26;9:21. doi: 10.1186/s13040-016-0097-1. eCollection 2016.

Data integration to prioritize drugs using genomics and curated data.

Louhimo R(1), Laakso M(1), Belitskin D(2), Klefström J(2), Lehtonen R(1),
Hautaniemi S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Genome Scale Biology Research Program, Research Programs Unit, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Helsinki, P.O. Box 63 (Haartmaninkatu 8), Helsinki,
FI-00014 Finland. (2)Translational Cancer Biology Research Program, Research
Programs Unit, Faculty of Medicine, University of Helsinki, P.O. Box 63
(Haartmaninkatu 8), Helsinki, FI-00014 Finland.

BACKGROUND: Genomic alterations affecting drug target proteins occur in several
tumor types and are prime candidates for patient-specific tailored treatments.
Increasingly, patients likely to benefit from targeted cancer therapy are
selected based on molecular alterations. The selection of a precision therapy
benefiting most patients is challenging but can be enhanced with integration of
multiple types of molecular data. Data integration approaches for drug
prioritization have successfully integrated diverse molecular data but do not
take full advantage of existing data and literature.
RESULTS: We have built a knowledge-base which connects data from public databases
with molecular results from over 2200 tumors, signaling pathways and drug-target 
databases. Moreover, we have developed a data mining algorithm to effectively
utilize this heterogeneous knowledge-base. Our algorithm is designed to
facilitate retargeting of existing drugs by stratifying samples and prioritizing 
drug targets. We analyzed 797 primary tumors from The Cancer Genome Atlas breast 
and ovarian cancer cohorts using our framework. FGFR, CDK and HER2 inhibitors
were prioritized in breast and ovarian data sets. Estrogen receptor positive
breast tumors showed potential sensitivity to targeted inhibitors of FGFR due to 
activation of FGFR3.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that computational sample stratification selects
potentially sensitive samples for targeted therapies and can aid in precision
medicine drug repositioning. Source code is available from
http://csblcanges.fimm.fi/GOPredict/.

DOI: 10.1186/s13040-016-0097-1 
PMCID: PMC4881054
PMID: 27231484 


1. Int J Biol Sci. 2016 Feb 12;12(4):427-45. doi: 10.7150/ijbs.12777. eCollection
2016.

MiRNA Transcriptome Profiling of Spheroid-Enriched Cells with Cancer Stem Cell
Properties in Human Breast MCF-7 Cell Line.

Boo L(1), Ho WY(2), Ali NM(1), Yeap SK(3), Ky H(4), Chan KG(5), Yin WF(5),
Satharasinghe DA(6), Liew WC(3), Tan SW(3), Ong HK(1), Cheong SK(7).

Author information: 
(1)1. Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Universiti Tunku Abdul Rahman,
43000 Cheras, Malaysia; (2)2. Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, University
of Nottingham (Malaysia Campus), 43500 Semenyih, Malaysia; (3)3. Institute of
Bioscience, Universiti Putra Malaysia, 43400 Serdang, Malaysia. (4)4. Department 
of Agriculture Genetics and Breeding, College of Agriculture and Applied Biology,
Cantho University, 84071, Vietnam. (5)5. Division of Genetics and Molecular
Biology, Institute of Biological Sciences, Faculty of Science, University of
Malaya, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. (6)3. Institute of Bioscience, Universiti Putra
Malaysia, 43400 Serdang, Malaysia.; 6. Faculty of Veterinary Medicine and Animal 
Science, University of Peradeniya, 20400, Sri Lanka. (7)1. Faculty of Medicine
and Health Sciences, Universiti Tunku Abdul Rahman, 43000 Cheras, Malaysia;; 7.
Cryocord Sdn Bhd, Persiaran Cyberpoint Selatan, 63000 Cyberjaya, Malaysia.

Breast cancer is the second leading cause of cancer-related mortality worldwide
as most patients often suffer cancer relapse. The reason is often attributed to
the presence of cancer stem cells (CSCs). Recent studies revealed that
dysregulation of microRNA (miRNA) are closely linked to breast cancer recurrence 
and metastasis. However, no specific study has comprehensively characterised the 
CSC characteristic and miRNA transcriptome in spheroid-enriched breast cells.
This study described the generation of spheroid MCF-7 cell in serum-free
condition and the comprehensive characterisation for their CSC properties.
Subsequently, miRNA expression differences between the spheroid-enriched CSC
cells and their parental cells were evaluated using next generation sequencing
(NGS). Our results showed that the MCF-7 spheroid cells were enriched with CSCs
properties, indicated by the ability to self-renew, increased expression of CSCs 
markers, and increased resistance to chemotherapeutic drugs. Additionally,
spheroid-enriched CSCs possessed greater cell proliferation, migration, invasion,
and wound healing ability. A total of 134 significantly (p<0.05) differentially
expressed miRNAs were identified between spheroids and parental cells using
miRNA-NGS. MiRNA-NGS analysis revealed 25 up-regulated and 109 down-regulated
miRNAs which includes some miRNAs previously reported in the regulation of breast
CSCs. A number of miRNAs (miR-4492, miR-4532, miR-381, miR-4508, miR-4448,
miR-1296, and miR-365a) which have not been previously reported in breast cancer 
were found to show potential association with breast cancer chemoresistance and
self-renewal capability. The gene ontology (GO) analysis showed that the
predicted genes were enriched in the regulation of metabolic processes, gene
expression, DNA binding, and hormone receptor binding. The corresponding pathway 
analyses inferred from the GO results were closely related to the function of
signalling pathway, self-renewability, chemoresistance, tumorigenesis,
cytoskeletal proteins, and metastasis in breast cancer. Based on these results,
we proposed that certain miRNAs identified in this study could be used as new
potential biomarkers for breast cancer stem cell diagnosis and targeted therapy.

DOI: 10.7150/ijbs.12777 
PMCID: PMC4807162
PMID: 27019627  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Oncotarget. 2016 Apr 12;7(15):20704-17. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.8007.

The long non-coding RNA EPB41L4A-AS2 inhibits tumor proliferation and is
associated with favorable prognoses in breast cancer and other solid tumors.

Xu S(1), Wang P(1), You Z(1), Meng H(2), Mu G(3), Bai X(1), Zhang G(1), Zhang
J(1), Pang D(1,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Breast Surgery, Harbin Medical University Cancer Hospital,
Harbin, China. (2)Department of Pathology, Harbin Medical University Cancer
Hospital, Harbin, China. (3)Biotherapy Center, Harbin Medical University Cancer
Hospital, Harbin, China. (4)Heilongjiang Academy of Medical Sciences, Harbin,
China.

EPB41L4A-AS2 is a novel long non-coding RNA of unknown function. In this study,
we investigated the expression of EPB41L4A-AS2 in breast cancer tissues and
evaluated its relationship with the clinicopathological features and prognosis of
patients with breast cancer. This entailed conducting a meta-analysis and
prognosis validation study using two cohorts from the Gene Expression Omnibus
(GEO). In addition, we assessed EPB41L4A-AS2 expression and its relationship with
the clinicopathological features of renal and lung cancers using the Cancer
Genome Atlas cohort and a GEO dataset. We also clarified the role of EPB41L4A-AS2
expression in mediating cancer cell proliferation in breast, renal, and lung
cancer cell lines transfected with an EPB41L4A-AS2 expression vector. We found
that high EPB41L4A-AS2 expression is associated with favorable disease outcomes. 
Gene ontology enrichment analysis revealed that EPB41L4A-AS2 may be involved in
processes associated with tumor biology. Finally, overexpression of EPB41L4A-AS2 
inhibited tumor cell proliferation in breast, renal, and lung cancer cell lines. 
Our clinical and in vitro results suggest that EPB41L4A-AS2 inhibits solid tumor 
formation and that evaluation of this long non-coding RNA may have prognostic
value in the clinical management of such malignancies.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.8007 
PMCID: PMC4991486
PMID: 26980733 


1. BMC Cancer. 2016 Mar 15;16:219. doi: 10.1186/s12885-016-2261-x.

Different Array CGH profiles within hereditary breast cancer tumors associated to
BRCA1 expression and overall survival.

Alvarez C(1), Aravena A(2,)(3), Tapia T(1), Rozenblum E(4), Solís L(5), Corvalán 
A(5), Camus M(6), Alvarez M(7), Munroe D(4), Maass A(2,)(8), Carvallo P(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Biology, Faculty of Biological Sciences, 
Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile, Santiago, Chile. (2)Mathomics, Center
for Mathematical Modeling (UMI 2807 CNRS) and Center for Genome Regulation
(Fondap 15090007), University of Chile, Santiago, Chile. (3)Department of
Molecular Biology and Genetics, Faculty of Science, Istanbul University,
Istanbul, 34134, Turkey. (4)Laboratory of Molecular Technology Advanced
Technology Program, SAIC-Frederick, Inc., National Cancer Institute-Frederick,
Frederick, MD, USA. (5)Department of Anatomo-Pathology, Faculty of Medicine,
Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile, Santiago, Chile. (6)Cancer Center,
Faculty of Medicine, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile, Santiago, Chile.
(7)Clinica Las Condes, Santiago, Chile. (8)Department of Mathematical
Engineering, University of Chile, Santiago, Chile. (9)Department of Cellular and 
Molecular Biology, Faculty of Biological Sciences, Pontificia Universidad
Católica de Chile, Santiago, Chile. pcarvallo@bio.puc.cl.

BACKGROUND: Array CGH analysis of breast tumors has contributed to the
identification of different genomic profiles in these tumors. Loss of DNA repair 
by BRCA1 functional deficiency in breast cancer has been proposed as a relevant
contribution to breast cancer progression for tumors with no germline mutation.
Identifying the genomic alterations taking place in BRCA1 not expressing tumors
will lead us to a better understanding of the cellular functions affected in this
heterogeneous disease. Moreover, specific genomic alterations may contribute to
the identification of potential therapeutic targets and offer a more personalized
treatment to breast cancer patients.
METHODS: Forty seven tumors from hereditary breast cancer cases, previously
analyzed for BRCA1 expression, and screened for germline BRCA1 and 2 mutations,
were analyzed by Array based Comparative Genomic Hybridization (aCGH) using
Agilent 4x44K arrays. Overall survival was established for tumors in different
clusters using Log-rank (Mantel-Cox) Test. Gene lists obtained from aCGH analysis
were analyzed for Gene Ontology enrichment using GOrilla and DAVID tools.
RESULTS: Genomic profiling of the tumors showed specific alterations associated
to BRCA1 or 2 mutation status, and BRCA1 expression in the tumors, affecting
relevant cellular processes. Similar cellular functions were found affected in
BRCA1 not expressing and BRCA1 or 2 mutated tumors. Hierarchical clustering
classified hereditary breast tumors in four major, groups according to the type
and amount of genomic alterations, showing one group with a significantly poor
overall survival (p = 0.0221). Within this cluster, deletion of PLEKHO1, GDF11,
DARC, DAG1 and CD63 may be associated to the worse outcome of the patients.
CONCLUSIONS: These results support the fact that BRCA1 lack of expression in
tumors should be used as a marker for BRCAness and to select these patients for
synthetic lethality approaches such as treatment with PARP inhibitors. In
addition, the identification of specific alterations in breast tumors associated 
with poor survival, immune response or with a BRCAness phenotype will allow the
use of a more personalized treatment in these patients.

DOI: 10.1186/s12885-016-2261-x 
PMCID: PMC4791866
PMID: 26979459  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Breast Cancer Res. 2016 Mar 15;18(1):33. doi: 10.1186/s13058-016-0690-8.

Comprehensive transcriptome analysis identifies novel molecular subtypes and
subtype-specific RNAs of triple-negative breast cancer.

Liu YR(1,)(2,)(3), Jiang YZ(1,)(2,)(3), Xu XE(1,)(2,)(3), Yu KD(1,)(2,)(3), Jin
X(1,)(2,)(3), Hu X(1,)(2,)(3), Zuo WJ(1,)(2,)(3), Hao S(1,)(2,)(3), Wu
J(1,)(2,)(3), Liu GY(1,)(2,)(3), Di GH(1,)(2,)(3), Li DQ(1,)(2,)(3,)(4), He
XH(1,)(2,)(3,)(4), Hu WG(1,)(2,)(3,)(4), Shao ZM(5,)(6,)(7,)(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Breast Surgery, Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center, 270
Dong-An Road, Shanghai, 200032, P.R. China. (2)Cancer Institute, Fudan University
Shanghai Cancer Center, 270 Dong-An Road, Shanghai, 200032, P.R. China.
(3)Department of Oncology, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University, 270
Dong-An Road, Shanghai, 200032, P.R. China. (4)Institutes of Biomedical Sciences,
Fudan University, Shanghai, P.R. China. (5)Department of Breast Surgery, Fudan
University Shanghai Cancer Center, 270 Dong-An Road, Shanghai, 200032, P.R.
China. zhimingshao@yahoo.com. (6)Cancer Institute, Fudan University Shanghai
Cancer Center, 270 Dong-An Road, Shanghai, 200032, P.R. China.
zhimingshao@yahoo.com. (7)Department of Oncology, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan
University, 270 Dong-An Road, Shanghai, 200032, P.R. China.
zhimingshao@yahoo.com. (8)Institutes of Biomedical Sciences, Fudan University,
Shanghai, P.R. China. zhimingshao@yahoo.com.

BACKGROUND: Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is a highly heterogeneous group 
of cancers, and molecular subtyping is necessary to better identify
molecular-based therapies. While some classifiers have been established, no one
has integrated the expression profiles of long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) into such
subtyping criterions. Considering the emerging important role of lncRNAs in
cellular processes, a novel classification integrating transcriptome profiles of 
both messenger RNA (mRNA) and lncRNA would help us better understand the
heterogeneity of TNBC.
METHODS: Using human transcriptome microarrays, we analyzed the transcriptome
profiles of 165 TNBC samples. We used k-means clustering and empirical cumulative
distribution function to determine optimal number of TNBC subtypes. Gene Ontology
(GO) and pathway analyses were applied to determine the main function of the
subtype-specific genes and pathways. We conducted co-expression network analyses 
to identify interactions between mRNAs and lncRNAs.
RESULTS: All of the 165 TNBC tumors were classified into four distinct clusters, 
including an immunomodulatory subtype (IM), a luminal androgen receptor subtype
(LAR), a mesenchymal-like subtype (MES) and a basal-like and immune suppressed
(BLIS) subtype. The IM subtype had high expressions of immune cell signaling and 
cytokine signaling genes. The LAR subtype was characterized by androgen receptor 
signaling. The MES subtype was enriched with growth factor signaling pathways.
The BLIS subtype was characterized by down-regulation of immune response genes,
activation of cell cycle, and DNA repair. Patients in this subtype experienced
worse recurrence-free survival than others (log rank test, P = 0.045).
Subtype-specific lncRNAs were identified, and their possible biological functions
were predicted using co-expression network analyses.
CONCLUSIONS: We developed a novel TNBC classification system integrating the
expression profiles of both mRNAs and lncRNAs and determined subtype-specific
lncRNAs that are potential biomarkers and targets. If further validated in a
larger population, our novel classification system could facilitate patient
counseling and individualize treatment of TNBC.

DOI: 10.1186/s13058-016-0690-8 
PMCID: PMC4791797
PMID: 26975198  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci. 2016;20(4):664-72.

Identification of key genes involved in HER2-positive breast cancer.

Zhong BL(1), Bian LJ, Wang GM, Zhou YF, Chen YY, Peng F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Second People's Hospital of Guangdong
Province/Guangdong Provincial Emergency Hospital, Guangzhou, P.R. China.
kejingwangkjw@163.com.

OBJECTIVE: As an invasive cancer, breast cancer is the most common tumour in
women and is with high mortality. To study the mechanisms of HER2-positive breast
cancer, we analyzed microarray of GSE52194.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: GSE52194 was downloaded from Gene Expression Omnibus
including 5 HER2-positive breast cancer samples and 3 normal breast samples.
Using cuffdiff software, differentially expressed genes (DEGs) and differentially
expressed long non-coding RNAs (DE-lncRNAs) were screened. Functions of the DEGs 
were analyzed by Gene Ontology (GO) and pathway enrichment analyses. Then,
protein-protein interaction (PPI) network of the DEGs was constructed using
Cytoscape and modules of the PPI network were screened by CFinder. Moreover,
lncRNA-DEG pairs were screened.
RESULTS: Total 209 lncRNA transcriptions were predicted, and 996 differentially
expressed transcriptions were screened. Besides, FOS had interaction
relationships with EGR1 and SOD2 separately in module E and F of the PPI network 
for the DEGs. Moreover, there were many lncRNA-DEG pairs (e.g.
TCONS_00003876-EGR1, TCONS_00003876-FOS, lnc-HOXC4-3:1-FOS, lnc-HOXC4-3:1-BCL6B, 
lnc-TEAD4-1:1-FOS and lnc-TEAD4-1:1-BCL6B), meanwhile, co-expressed DEGs of
TCONS_00003876, lnc-HOXC4-3:1 and lnc-TEAD4-1:1 were enriched in p53 signaling
pathway, MAPK signaling pathway and cancer-related pathways, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: ANXA1, EGR1, BCL6, SOD2, FOS, TCONS_00003876, lnc-HOXC4-3:1 and
lnc-TEAD4-1:1 might play a role in HER2-positive breast cancer.


PMID: 26957268  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Sci Rep. 2016 Mar 2;6:22388. doi: 10.1038/srep22388.

Pharmacoproteomic analysis reveals that metapristone (RU486 metabolite)
intervenes E-cadherin and vimentin to realize cancer metastasis chemoprevention.

Yu S(1), Yan C(1), Yang X(1), He S(1), Liu J(1), Qin C(2), Huang C(3), Lu Y(1),
Tian Z(1), Jia L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Metastasis Alert and Prevention Center, College of Chemistry, Fuzhou
University, Fuzhou, 350002, China. (2)School of Integrated Traditional Chinese
and Western Medicine, Fujian University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Fuzhou
Fujian, 350108, China. (3)Internal Oncology Laboratory, Fujian Provincial Key
Laboratory of Translational Medicine Oncology, Fujian Provincial Cancer Hospital,
Fuzhou, Fujian, 350002, China.

Metapristone is the most predominant biological active metabolite of
mifepristone, and being developed as a novel cancer metastasis chemopreventive
agent by us. Despite its prominent metastasis chemopreventive effect, the
underlying mechanism remains elusive. Our study, for the first time, demonstrated
that metapristone had the ability to prevent breast cancer cells from migration, 
invasion, and interfere with their adhesion to endothelial cells. To explore the 
underlying mechanism of metapristone, we employed the iTRAQ technique to assess
the effect of metapristone on MDA-MB-231 cells. In total, 5,145 proteins were
identified, of which, 311 proteins showed significant differences in
metapristone-treated cells compared to the control group (P-value < 0.05).
Bioinformatic analysis showed many differentially expressed proteins (DEPs)
functionally associated with post-translational modification, chaperones,
translation, transcription, replication, signal transduction, etc. Importantly,
many of the DEPs, such as E-cadherin, vimentin, TGF-β receptor I/II, smad2/3,
β-catenin, caveolin, and dystroglycan were associated with TGF-β and Wnt
signaling pathways, which were also linked to epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) process. Further validation of the epithelial marker "E-caderin"
and mesenchymal marker "vimetin" were carried out using immunoblot and
immunofluorescence. These results have revealed a novel mechanism that
metapristone-mediated metastasis chemoprevention is through intervening the
EMT-related signaling pathways.

DOI: 10.1038/srep22388 
PMCID: PMC4773818
PMID: 26932781  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Onco Targets Ther. 2016 Feb 12;9:761-72. doi: 10.2147/OTT.S97664. eCollection
2016.

Expression profile analysis of long noncoding RNA in HER-2-enriched subtype
breast cancer by next-generation sequencing and bioinformatics.

Yang F(1), Lyu S(1), Dong S(1), Liu Y(1), Zhang X(1), Wang O(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Oncology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou
Medical University, Wenzhou, Zhejiang, People's Republic of China.

BACKGROUND: Human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER-2)-enriched subtype
breast cancer is associated with a more aggressive phenotype and shorter survival
time. Long non-coding RNAs (LncRNAs) have essential roles in tumorigenesis and
occupy a central place in cancer progression. Notably, few studies have focused
on the dysregulation of LncRNAs in the HER-2-enriched subtype breast cancer. In
this study, we analyzed the expression profile of LncRNAs and mRNAs in this
particular subtype of breast cancer.
METHODS: Seven pairs of HER-2-enriched subtype breast cancer and normal tissue
were sequenced. We screened out differently expressed genes and measured the
correlation of the expression levels of dysregulated LncRNAs and HER-2 by
Pearson's correlation coefficient analysis. Gene ontology analysis and pathway
analysis were used to understand the biological roles of these differently
expressed genes. Pathway act network and coexpression network were constructed.
RESULTS: More than 1,300 LncRNAs and 2,800 mRNAs, which were significantly
differently expressed, were identified. Among these LncRNAs, AFAP1-AS1 was the
most dysregulated LncRNA, while ORM2 was the most dysregulated mRNA. LOC100288637
had the highest positive correlation coefficient of 0.93 with HER-2, while
RPL13P5 had the highest negative correlation coefficient of -0.87. The pathway
act network showed that MAPK signaling pathway, PI3K-Akt signaling pathway,
metabolic pathways, cell cycle, and regulation of actin cytoskeleton were highly 
related with HER-2-enriched subtype breast cancer. Coexpression network
recognized LINC00636, LINC01405, ADARB2-AS1, ST8SIA6-AS1, LINC00511, and
DPP10-AS1 as core genes.
CONCLUSION: These results analyze the functions of LncRNAs and provide useful
information for exploring candidate therapeutic targets and new molecular
biomarkers for HER-2-enriched subtype breast cancer.

DOI: 10.2147/OTT.S97664 
PMCID: PMC4758788
PMID: 26929647 


1. Oncotarget. 2016 Mar 15;7(11):13047-59. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7509.

LncRNAs as new biomarkers to differentiate triple negative breast cancer from
non-triple negative breast cancer.

Lv M(1), Xu P(1), Wu Y(1), Huang L(2), Li W(2), Lv S(1), Wu X(3), Zeng X(1), Shen
R(1), Jia X(1), Yin Y(2), Gu Y(4), Yuan H(1,)(5), Xie H(1,)(2), Fu Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Nanjing Maternity and Child Health Medical Institute, Affiliated Nanjing
Maternal and Child Health Hospital, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China.
(2)First Affiliated Hospital, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China.
(3)Department of Pharmacology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Nanjing Medical 
University, Nanjing, China. (4)Department of Pathology, Affiliated Nanjing
Maternal and Child Health Hospital, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China.
(5)Department of Oncology and Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown
University Medical Center, Washington, D.C., USA.

Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) is an aggressive type of breast cancer with 
high heterogeneity. To date, there is no efficient therapy for TNBC patients and 
the prognosis is poor. It is urgent to find new biomarkers for the diagnosis of
TNBC or efficient therapy targets. As an area of focus in the post-genome period,
long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) have been found to play critical roles in many
cancers, including TNBC. However, there is little information on differentially
expressed lncRNAs between TNBC and non-TNBC. We detected the expression levels of
lncRNAs in TNBC and non-TNBC tissues separately. Then we analyzed the lncRNA
expression signature of TNBC relative to non-TNBC, and found dysregulated lncRNAs
participated in important biological processes though Gene Ontology and Pathway
analysis. Finally, we validated these lncRNA expression levels in breast cancer
tissues and cells, and then confirmed that 4 lncRNAs (RP11-434D9.1, LINC00052,
BC016831, and IGKV) were correlated with TNBC occurrence through receiver
operating characteristic curve analysis. This study offers helpful information to
understand the initiation and development mechanisms of TNBC comprehensively and 
suggests potential biomarkers for diagnosis or therapy targets for clinical
treatment.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.7509 
PMCID: PMC4914340
PMID: 26910840 


1. PLoS One. 2016 Feb 12;11(2):e0148977. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0148977.
eCollection 2016.

A Feature Selection Algorithm to Compute Gene Centric Methylation from Probe
Level Methylation Data.

Baur B(1), Bozdag S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Math, Statistics and Computer Science, Marquette University,
Milwaukee, Wisconsin, United States of America.

DNA methylation is an important epigenetic event that effects gene expression
during development and various diseases such as cancer. Understanding the
mechanism of action of DNA methylation is important for downstream analysis. In
the Illumina Infinium HumanMethylation 450K array, there are tens of probes
associated with each gene. Given methylation intensities of all these probes, it 
is necessary to compute which of these probes are most representative of the gene
centric methylation level. In this study, we developed a feature selection
algorithm based on sequential forward selection that utilized different
classification methods to compute gene centric DNA methylation using probe level 
DNA methylation data. We compared our algorithm to other feature selection
algorithms such as support vector machines with recursive feature elimination,
genetic algorithms and ReliefF. We evaluated all methods based on the predictive 
power of selected probes on their mRNA expression levels and found that a
K-Nearest Neighbors classification using the sequential forward selection
algorithm performed better than other algorithms based on all metrics. We also
observed that transcriptional activities of certain genes were more sensitive to 
DNA methylation changes than transcriptional activities of other genes. Our
algorithm was able to predict the expression of those genes with high accuracy
using only DNA methylation data. Our results also showed that those DNA
methylation-sensitive genes were enriched in Gene Ontology terms related to the
regulation of various biological processes.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0148977 
PMCID: PMC4752315
PMID: 26872146  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. BMC Bioinformatics. 2016 Jan 11;17 Suppl 1:10. doi: 10.1186/s12859-015-0853-0.

Missing value imputation for microRNA expression data by using a GO-based
similarity measure.

Yang Y(1,)(2), Xu Z(3), Song D(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
800 Dongchuan Rd., Shanghai, 200240, China. yangyang@cs.sjtu.edu.cn. (2)Key
Laboratory of Shanghai Education Commission for Intelligent Interaction and
Cognitive Engineering, Shanghai, 200240, China. yangyang@cs.sjtu.edu.cn.
(3)Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
800 Dongchuan Rd., Shanghai, 200240, China. xzdandy@gmail.com. (4)School of
Computer Science and Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing100081, 
China. sdd@bit.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Missing values are commonly present in microarray data profiles.
Instead of discarding genes or samples with incomplete expression level, missing 
values need to be properly imputed for accurate data analysis. The imputation
methods can be roughly categorized as expression level-based and domain
knowledge-based. The first type of methods only rely on expression data without
the help of external data sources, while the second type incorporates available
domain knowledge into expression data to improve imputation accuracy. In recent
years, microRNA (miRNA) microarray has been largely developed and used for
identifying miRNA biomarkers in complex human disease studies. Similar to mRNA
profiles, miRNA expression profiles with missing values can be treated with the
existing imputation methods. However, the domain knowledge-based methods are hard
to be applied due to the lack of direct functional annotation for miRNAs. With
the rapid accumulation of miRNA microarray data, it is increasingly needed to
develop domain knowledge-based imputation algorithms specific to miRNA expression
profiles to improve the quality of miRNA data analysis.
RESULTS: We connect miRNAs with domain knowledge of Gene Ontology (GO) via their 
target genes, and define miRNA functional similarity based on the semantic
similarity of GO terms in GO graphs. A new measure combining miRNA functional
similarity and expression similarity is used in the imputation of missing values.
The new measure is tested on two miRNA microarray datasets from breast cancer
research and achieves improved performance compared with the expression-based
method on both datasets.
CONCLUSIONS: The experimental results demonstrate that the biological domain
knowledge can benefit the estimation of missing values in miRNA profiles as well 
as mRNA profiles. Especially, functional similarity defined by GO terms annotated
for the target genes of miRNAs can be useful complementary information for the
expression-based method to improve the imputation accuracy of miRNA array data.
Our method and data are available to the public upon request.

DOI: 10.1186/s12859-015-0853-0 
PMCID: PMC4895707
PMID: 26818962  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Oncol Lett. 2015 Dec;10(6):3488-3494. Epub 2015 Sep 25.

Systematic analysis of the p53-related microRNAs in breast cancer revealing their
essential roles in the cell cycle.

Zhou E(1), Hui NA(2), Shu M(2), Wu B(1), Zhou J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, The Second Xiangya Hospital, Central South
University, Changsha, Hunan 410011, P.R. China. (2)Key Laboratory of Protein
Chemistry and Developmental Biology of the Ministry of Education, College of Life
Science, Hunan Normal University, Changsha, Hunan 410081, P.R. China.

Numerous miRNAs have been found to be involved in the regulation of the p53
signaling pathway. Conversely, p53 regulates the transcription or processing of
microRNAs (miRNAs). Given that complexities in the association between p53 and
miRNAs exist, and due to the rapidly increasing amount of literature regarding
the interactions between p53 and miRNAs, the present study systematically
analyzed the associations between miRNAs and p53 in breast cancer using a
literature-based discovery approach, natural language processing. A total of 22
miRNAs were found to be associated with p53. Next, three popular online tools
(PicTar, miRanda and TargetScan) were used to predict the targets of each miRNA, 
and certain targets were validated by experiments. Gene Ontology annotation and
network analysis demonstrated that the majority of the targets of the p53-related
miRNAs were enriched in the cell cycle process. These results suggest that, in
addition to regulating the transcription of cell cycle-related genes, p53 also
indirectly modulates the cell cycle via miRNAs.

DOI: 10.3892/ol.2015.3751 
PMCID: PMC4665839
PMID: 26788155 


1. Pathol Res Pract. 2016 Mar;212(3):196-203. doi: 10.1016/j.prp.2015.12.008. Epub
2015 Dec 29.

The stem cell renewal and DNA damage response pathways are frequently altered in 
fibroepithelial tumors of breast in Indian patients.

Mukherjee N(1), Islam MS(2), Roychowdhury A(3), Bhattacharya R(4), Chunder N(5), 
Bhattacharya N(6), Sinha S(7), Alam N(8), Roy A(9), Roychoudhury S(10), Panda
CK(11).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncogene Regulation, Chittaranjan National Cancer Institute, 37,
S.P. Mukherjee Road, Kolkata, West Bengal 700026, India. Electronic address:
nupurmukherjee10@gmail.com. (2)Department of Oncogene Regulation, Chittaranjan
National Cancer Institute, 37, S.P. Mukherjee Road, Kolkata, West Bengal 700026, 
India. Electronic address: saimulislam80@gmail.com. (3)Department of Oncogene
Regulation, Chittaranjan National Cancer Institute, 37, S.P. Mukherjee Road,
Kolkata, West Bengal 700026, India. Electronic address: rittwikab@gmail.com.
(4)Department of Oncogene Regulation, Chittaranjan National Cancer Institute, 37,
S.P. Mukherjee Road, Kolkata, West Bengal 700026, India. Electronic address:
anirbanr91@gmail.com. (5)Department of Oncogene Regulation, Chittaranjan National
Cancer Institute, 37, S.P. Mukherjee Road, Kolkata, West Bengal 700026, India.
(6)Department of Oncogene Regulation, Chittaranjan National Cancer Institute, 37,
S.P. Mukherjee Road, Kolkata, West Bengal 700026, India. Electronic address:
bhattacharya.n@gmail.com. (7)Department of Oncogene Regulation, Chittaranjan
National Cancer Institute, 37, S.P. Mukherjee Road, Kolkata, West Bengal 700026, 
India; Department of Ophthalmology, West Virginia University, Morgantown, WV,
United States. Electronic address: satyabratasinha@gmail.com. (8)Department of
Surgical Oncology, Chittaranjan National Cancer Institute, Kolkata, India.
Electronic address: nalam@cnci.org.in. (9)Department of Pathology, Sushruta
Nagar, Darjeeling, West Bengal, India. Electronic address: anuproy99@yahoo.com.
(10)Cancer Biology and Inflammatory Disorder Division, CSIR-Indian Institute of
Chemical Biology, Kolkata, West Bengal, India. Electronic address:
susantarc@gmail.com. (11)Department of Oncogene Regulation, Chittaranjan National
Cancer Institute, 37, S.P. Mukherjee Road, Kolkata, West Bengal 700026, India.
Electronic address: ckpanda.cnci@gmail.com.

Genetic and epigenetic alterations in genes associated with distinct cellular
pathways were checked in fibroepithelial tumors, including fibroadenomas, benign 
and malignant phyllode and atypical ductal hyperplasia. A panel of 22 genes
associated with different cellular pathways such as stem cell renewal (Wnt and
Hedgehog), DNA damage response [homologous recombination (HR), mismatch repair
(MMR) and nucleotide excision repair (NER)] and cell proliferation signaling
pathway were tested. Alterations (genetic/epigenetic) of the genes associated
with Wnt signaling pathway were detected in 100% (20/20) of the breast tumors for
at least one out of the six Wnt antagonists tested. Frequent molecular
alterations (57-64%) were detected in HR and MMR pathway and low frequency of
alterations (8-25%) were seen in cell-proliferation and cell signaling pathways
showing a differential pattern of alterations in different tumor types. The
patterns of alterations, in particular the epigenetic alterations, differed
little from that seen previously in breast carcinoma cells, suggesting epigenetic
alterations to be an early event in the development of the tumors. In gene
ontology analysis, it was evident that Wnt signaling pathway [GO: 0030111, Kegg: 
04310], cell proliferation pathway [GO: 0008285] and pathways in cancer [Kegg:
05200] were significantly enriched by differentially altered genes in
fibroadenoma and phyllode tumor types. All these results may provide a new
breakthrough in early diagnosis, prognosis and treatment of these tumors.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.prp.2015.12.008 
PMID: 26774289  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Clin Cancer Res. 2016 May 15;22(10):2417-26. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-15-1691. 
Epub 2016 Jan 14.

An Endothelial Gene Signature Score Predicts Poor Outcome in Patients with
Endocrine-Treated, Low Genomic Grade Breast Tumors.

Tobin NP(1), Wennmalm K(2), Lindström LS(3), Foukakis T(2), He L(4), Genové G(5),
Östman A(2), Landberg G(6), Betsholtz C(7), Bergh J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology and Pathology, Karolinska Institutet and University
Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden. nick.tobin@ki.se. (2)Department of Oncology and
Pathology, Karolinska Institutet and University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden.
(3)Department of Surgery, University of California at San Francisco (UCSF), San
Francisco, California. Department of Biosciences and Nutrition, Karolinska
Institutet and University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden. (4)Department of
Immunology, Genetics and Pathology, Rudbeck Laboratory, Uppsala University,
Uppsala, Sweden. (5)Division of Vascular Biology, Department of Medical
Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(6)Sahlgrenska Cancer Center, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(7)Department of Immunology, Genetics and Pathology, Rudbeck Laboratory, Uppsala 
University, Uppsala, Sweden. Division of Vascular Biology, Department of Medical 
Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.

PURPOSE: The ability of vascular genes to provide treatment predictive
information in breast cancer patients remains unclear. As such, we assessed the
expression of genes representative of normal endothelial microvasculature (MV) in
relation to treatment-specific patient subgroups.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We used expression data from 993 breast tumors to assess 57 
MV genes (summarized to yield an MV score) as well as the genomic grade index
(GGI) and PAM50 signatures. MV score was compared with CD31 staining by
correlation and gene ontology (GO) analysis, along with clinicopathologic
characteristics and PAM50 subtypes. Uni-, multivariate, and/or t-test analyses
were performed in all and treatment-specific subgroups, along with a clinical
trial cohort of patients with metastatic breast cancer, seven of whom received
antiangiogenic therapy.
RESULTS: MV score did not correlate with microvessel density (correlation =
0.096), but displayed enrichment for angiogenic GO terms, and was lower in
Luminal B tumors. In endocrine-treated patients, a high MV score was associated
with decreased risk of metastasis [HR 0.58; 95% confidence interval (CI),
0.38-0.89], even after adjusting for histologic grade, but not GGI or PAM50.
Subgroup analysis showed the prognostic strength of the MV score resided in low
genomic grade tumors and MV score was significantly increased in metastatic
breast tumors after treatment with sunitinib + docetaxel (P = 0.031).
CONCLUSIONS: MV score identifies two groups of better and worse survival in
low-risk endocrine-treated breast cancer patients. We also show normalization of 
tumor vasculature on a transcriptional level in response to an angiogenic
inhibitor in human breast cancer samples. Clin Cancer Res; 22(10); 2417-26. ©2016
AACR.

©2016 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-15-1691 
PMID: 26769751 


1. Sci Rep. 2016 Jan 11;6:18871. doi: 10.1038/srep18871.

LEGO: a novel method for gene set over-representation analysis by incorporating
network-based gene weights.

Dong X(1), Hao Y(1), Wang X(1), Tian W(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, Department of Biostatistics and
Computational Biology, School of Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai
200436, P.R. China. (2)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, Collaborative
Innovation Center of Genetics and Development, Department of Biostatistics and
Computational Biology, School of Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai
100433, P.R. China. (3)Children's Hospital of Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, 
P.R. China.

Pathway or gene set over-representation analysis (ORA) has become a routine task 
in functional genomics studies. However, currently widely used ORA tools employ
statistical methods such as Fisher's exact test that reduce a pathway into a list
of genes, ignoring the constitutive functional non-equivalent roles of genes and 
the complex gene-gene interactions. Here, we develop a novel method named LEGO
(functional Link Enrichment of Gene Ontology or gene sets) that takes into
consideration these two types of information by incorporating network-based gene 
weights in ORA analysis. In three benchmarks, LEGO achieves better performance
than Fisher and three other network-based methods. To further evaluate LEGO's
usefulness, we compare LEGO with five gene expression-based and three pathway
topology-based methods using a benchmark of 34 disease gene expression datasets
compiled by a recent publication, and show that LEGO is among the top-ranked
methods in terms of both sensitivity and prioritization for detecting target KEGG
pathways. In addition, we develop a cluster-and-filter approach to reduce the
redundancy among the enriched gene sets, making the results more interpretable to
biologists. Finally, we apply LEGO to two lists of autism genes, and identify
relevant gene sets to autism that could not be found by Fisher.

DOI: 10.1038/srep18871 
PMCID: PMC4707541
PMID: 26750448  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Oncotarget. 2016 Feb 2;7(5):6159-74. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.6740.

A subset of myofibroblastic cancer-associated fibroblasts regulate collagen fiber
elongation, which is prognostic in multiple cancers.

Hanley CJ(1), Noble F(1), Ward M(1), Bullock M(1), Drifka C(2), Mellone M(1),
Manousopoulou A(3), Johnston HE(3), Hayden A(1), Thirdborough S(1), Liu Y(2),
Smith DM(1), Mellows T(1), Kao WJ(2), Garbis SD(1,)(3), Mirnezami A(1), Underwood
TJ(1), Eliceiri KW(2), Thomas GJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Sciences Unit, Faculty of Medicine, University of Southampton,
Southampton SO16 6YD, UK. (2)Laboratory for Optical and Computational
Instrumentation (LOCI), Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of
Madison, Wisconsin 53706, USA. (3)Clinical and Experimental Sciences Unit,
Faculty of Medicine, University of Southampton, Southampton SO16 6YD, UK.

Collagen structure has been shown to influence tumor cell invasion, metastasis
and clinical outcome in breast cancer. However, it remains unclear how it affects
other solid cancers. Here we utilized multi-photon laser scanning microscopy and 
Second Harmonic Generation to identify alterations to collagen fiber structure
within the tumor stroma of head & neck, esophageal and colorectal cancers. Image 
segmentation algorithms were then applied to quantitatively characterize these
morphological changes, showing that elongated collagen fibers significantly
correlated with poor clinical outcome (Log Rank p < 0.05). We used TGF-β
treatment to model fibroblast conversion to smooth muscle actin SMA-positive
cancer associated fibroblasts (CAFs) and found that these cells induce the
formation of elongated collagen fibers in vivo. However, proteomic/transcriptomic
analysis of SMA-positive CAFs cultured ex-vivo showed significant heterogeneity
in the expression of genes with collagen fibril organizing gene ontology.
Notably, stratifying patients according to stromal SMA-positivity and collagen
fiber elongation was found to provide a highly significant correlation with poor 
survival in all 3 cancer types (Log Rank p ≤ 0.003). In summary, we show that
increased collagen fiber length correlates with poor patient survival in multiple
tumor types and that only a sub-set of SMA-positive CAFs can mediate the
formation of this collagen structure.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.6740 
PMCID: PMC4868747
PMID: 26716418  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Oncol Rep. 2016 Mar;35(3):1689-95. doi: 10.3892/or.2015.4523. Epub 2015 Dec 28.

Overexpressed genes associated with hormones in terminal ductal lobular units
identified by global transcriptome analysis: An insight into the anatomic origin 
of breast cancer.

Yang J(1), Yu H(1), Zhang L(2), Deng H(2), Wang Q(1), Li W(1), Zhang A(1), Gao
H(3), Yin A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Breast Disease Center, Guangdong Women and Children's Hospital, Guangzhou,
Guangdong 511400, P.R. China. (2)Translational Medicine Center, Guangdong Women
and Children's Hospital, Guangzhou, Guangdong 511400, P.R. China. (3)Department
of Pathology, Guangdong Women and Children's Hospital, Guangzhou, Guangdong
511400, P.R. China. (4)Medical Genetics Center, Guangdong Women and Children's
Hospital, Guangzhou, Guangdong 511400, P.R. China.

Although human breast ducts and terminal ductal lobular units (TDLUs) share the
same cell types, ample evidence shows that TDLUs are the predominant site for the
origin of breast cancer. Yet, there is still limited information concerning the
molecular mechanisms. Analysis of transcriptomic profiles in TDLUs may provide
insight into early breast tumorigenesis. We compared genome-wide expression
profiles of 8 matched sets of breast main duct and TDLU samples, using
significance analysis of microarray (SAM) software to screen differentially
expressed genes (DEGs) with fold-change >2.0 and q-value <0.05. Moreover, we used
Gene Ontology for functional enrichment analysis. We identified 472 DEGs between 
the two tissue types, and confirmed 17 randomly chosen DEGs by quantitative
reverse transcription-PCR (qRT-PCR). Notably, hormone-related pathways were
highly enriched in the TDLU samples, including various hormone-related DEGs that 
are associated with breast carcinogenesis and tumor progression. Oncogenic
upregulation in TDLUs indicates a potential inappropriate or excessive response
to successive hormone stimulus during the proliferation, differentiation and
lactation cycles of the human mammary gland. Imbalanced hormone reactions may
finally result in the early onset of neoplastic transformation that occurs mostly
in breast TDLUs.

DOI: 10.3892/or.2015.4523 
PMID: 26707748  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Epigenetics. 2015;10(11):1074-83. doi: 10.1080/15592294.2015.1106673.

A lincRNA connected to cell mortality and epigenetically-silenced in most common 
human cancers.

Vrba L(1), Garbe JC(2), Stampfer MR(1,)(2), Futscher BW(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)a Arizona Cancer Center; The University of Arizona ; Tucson , AZ USA. (2)b
Life Sciences Division; Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory ; Berkeley , CA
USA. (3)c Department of Pharmacology & Toxicology ; College of Pharmacy; The
University of Arizona ; Tucson , AZ USA.

Immortality is an essential characteristic of human carcinoma cells. We recently 
developed an efficient, reproducible method that immortalizes human mammary
epithelial cells (HMEC) in the absence of gross genomic changes by targeting 2
critical senescence barriers. Consistent transcriptomic changes associated with
immortality were identified using microarray analysis of isogenic normal finite
pre-stasis, abnormal finite post-stasis, and immortal HMECs from 4 individuals. A
total of 277 genes consistently changed in cells that transitioned from
post-stasis to immortal. Gene ontology analysis of affected genes revealed
biological processes significantly altered in the immortalization process. These 
immortalization-associated changes showed striking similarity to the gene
expression changes seen in The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) clinical breast cancer 
data. The most dramatic change in gene expression seen during the immortalization
step was the downregulation of an unnamed, incompletely annotated transcript that
we called MORT, for mortality, since its expression was closely associated with
the mortal, finite lifespan phenotype. We show here that MORT (ZNF667-AS1) is
expressed in all normal finite lifespan human cells examined to date and is lost 
in immortalized HMEC. MORT gene silencing at the mortal/immortal boundary was due
to DNA hypermethylation of its CpG island promoter. This epigenetic silencing is 
also seen in human breast cancer cell lines and in a majority of human breast
tumor tissues. The functional importance of DNA hypermethylation in MORT gene
silencing is supported by the ability of 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine to reactivate
MORT expression. Analysis of TCGA data revealed deregulation of MORT expression
due to DNA hypermethylation in 15 out of the 17 most common human cancers. The
epigenetic silencing of MORT in a large majority of the common human cancers
suggests a potential fundamental role in cellular immortalization during human
carcinogenesis.

DOI: 10.1080/15592294.2015.1106673 
PMCID: PMC4844203
PMID: 26646903  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Breast Cancer Res. 2015 Dec 8;17(1):149. doi: 10.1186/s13058-015-0658-0.

HDAC6 activity is a non-oncogene addiction hub for inflammatory breast cancers.

Putcha P(1), Yu J(2), Rodriguez-Barrueco R(3,)(4), Saucedo-Cuevas L(5),
Villagrasa P(6), Murga-Penas E(7), Quayle SN(8), Yang M(9), Castro V(10),
Llobet-Navas D(11), Birnbaum D(12), Finetti P(13), Woodward WA(14), Bertucci
F(15), Alpaugh ML(16), Califano A(17,)(18,)(19), Silva J(20).

Author information: 
(1)Herbert Irving Comprehensive Cancer Center, Columbia University, 1130 St.
Nicholas Avenue, New York, NY, 10032, USA. preeti.putcha@gmail.com. (2)Department
of Biomedical Informatics, Department of Systems Biology, Center for
Computational Biology and Bioinformatics, Herbert Irving Comprehensive Cancer
Center, Columbia University, New York, NY, 10032, USA. yujiyang@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Pathology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York,
NY, 10029-6574, USA. ruth.rodriguez-barrueco@mssm.edu. (4)Department of Radiation
Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA.
ruth.rodriguez-barrueco@mssm.edu. (5)Department of Pathology, Icahn School of
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, 10029-6574, USA.
laura.saucedo-cuevas@mssm.edu. (6)Department of Pathology, Columbia University
Medical Center, 630 West 168th Street, New York, NY, 10032, USA.
patricia.villagrasa@gmail.com. (7)Department of Pathology, Columbia University
Medical Center, 630 West 168th Street, New York, NY, 10032, USA.
emurga@medgen.uni-kiel.de. (8)Acetylon Pharmaceuticals, Inc., 70 Fargo St, Suite 
205, Boston, MA, 02210, USA. squayle@acetylon.com. (9)Acetylon Pharmaceuticals,
Inc., 70 Fargo St, Suite 205, Boston, MA, 02210, USA. myang@acetylon.com.
(10)Department of Pathology, Columbia University Medical Center, 630 West 168th
Street, New York, NY, 10032, USA. vc2252@gmail.com. (11)Department of Pathology, 
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, 10029-6574, USA.
david.llobet@mssm.edu. (12)Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de Marseille,
Institut Paoli-Calmettes, Aix-Marseille Université, Marseille, France.
daniel.birnbaum@inserm.fr. (13)Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de Marseille, 
Institut Paoli-Calmettes, Aix-Marseille Université, Marseille, France.
FINETTIP@ipc.unicancer.fr. (14)Department of Radiation Oncology, The University
of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA. wwoodward@mdanderson.org.
(15)Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de Marseille, Institut Paoli-Calmettes,
Aix-Marseille Université, Marseille, France. BERTUCCIF@ipc.unicancer.fr.
(16)Department of Surgery, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, 
10065, USA. alpaughm@mskcc.org. (17)Department of Biomedical Informatics,
Department of Systems Biology, Center for Computational Biology and
Bioinformatics, Herbert Irving Comprehensive Cancer Center, Columbia University, 
New York, NY, 10032, USA. califano@c2b2.columbia.edu. (18)Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics, Institute for Cancer Genetics, Columbia
University, New York, NY, 10032, USA. califano@c2b2.columbia.edu. (19)Herbert
Irving Comprehensive Cancer Center, Columbia University, 1130 St. Nicholas
Avenue, New York, NY, 10032, USA. califano@c2b2.columbia.edu. (20)Department of
Pathology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, 10029-6574,
USA. jose.silva@mssm.edu.

INTRODUCTION: Inflammatory breast cancer (IBC) is the most lethal form of breast 
cancers with a 5-year survival rate of only 40 %. Despite its lethality, IBC
remains poorly understood which has greatly limited its therapeutic management.
We thus decided to utilize an integrative functional genomic strategy to identify
the Achilles' heel of IBC cells.
METHODS: We have pioneered the development of genetic tools as well as
experimental and analytical strategies to perform RNAi-based loss-of-function
studies at a genome-wide level. Importantly, we and others have demonstrated that
these functional screens are able to identify essential functions linked to
certain cancer phenotypes. Thus, we decided to use this approach to identify IBC 
specific sensitivities.
RESULTS: We identified and validated HDAC6 as a functionally necessary gene to
maintain IBC cell viability, while being non-essential for other breast cancer
subtypes. Importantly, small molecule inhibitors for HDAC6 already exist and are 
in clinical trials for other tumor types. We thus demonstrated that Ricolinostat 
(ACY1215), a leading HDAC6 inhibitor, efficiently controls IBC cell proliferation
both in vitro and in vivo. Critically, functional HDAC6 dependency is not
associated with genomic alterations at its locus and thus represents a
non-oncogene addiction. Despite HDAC6 not being overexpressed, we found that its 
activity is significantly higher in IBC compared to non-IBC cells, suggesting a
possible rationale supporting the observed dependency.
CONCLUSION: Our finding that IBC cells are sensitive to HDAC6 inhibition provides
a foundation to rapidly develop novel, efficient, and well-tolerated targeted
therapy strategies for IBC patients.

DOI: 10.1186/s13058-015-0658-0 
PMCID: PMC4672555
PMID: 26643555  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Sci Rep. 2015 Nov 30;5:17409. doi: 10.1038/srep17409.

Transcriptome analysis of human OXR1 depleted cells reveals its role in
regulating the p53 signaling pathway.

Yang M(1,)(2), Lin X(2,)(3), Rowe A(2), Rognes T(1,)(4), Eide L(2), Bjørås
M(1,)(2,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Oslo University Hospital and University of Oslo,
Norway. (2)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Oslo University Hospital and
University of Oslo, Norway. (3)Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational
Research (Ministry of Education), Department of Breast Oncology, Peking
University Cancer Hospital and Institute, Beijing, P.R. China. (4)Department of
Informatics, University of Oslo, Norway. (5)Department of Cancer Research and
Molecular Medicine, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Trondheim,
Norway.

The oxidation resistance gene 1 (OXR1) is crucial for protecting against
oxidative stress; however, its molecular function is unknown. We employed RNA
sequencing to examine the role of human OXR1 for genome wide transcription
regulation. In total, in non-treated and hydrogen peroxide exposed HeLa cells,
OXR1 depletion resulted in down-regulation of 554 genes and up-regulation of 253 
genes. These differentially expressed genes include transcription factors (i.e.
HIF1A, SP6, E2F8 and TCF3), antioxidant genes (PRDX4, PTGS1 and CYGB) and
numerous genes of the p53 signaling pathway involved in cell-cycle arrest (i.e.
cyclin D, CDK6 and RPRM) and apoptosis (i.e. CytC and CASP9). We demonstrated
that OXR1 depleted cells undergo cell cycle arrest in G2/M phase during oxidative
stress and increase protein expression of the apoptosis initiator protease CASP9.
In summary, OXR1 may act as a sensor of cellular oxidative stress to regulate the
transcriptional networks required to detoxify reactive oxygen species and
modulate cell cycle and apoptosis.

DOI: 10.1038/srep17409 
PMCID: PMC4663793
PMID: 26616534  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Tumour Biol. 2016 Apr;37(4):5247-56. doi: 10.1007/s13277-015-4402-2. Epub 2015
Nov 10.

Exosomes decrease sensitivity of breast cancer cells to adriamycin by delivering 
microRNAs.

Mao L(1,)(2), Li J(1,)(3), Chen WX(1,)(3), Cai YQ(4), Yu DD(1,)(3), Zhong SL(5), 
Zhao JH(5), Zhou JW(6,)(7), Tang JH(8,)(9).

Author information: 
(1)The Fourth Clinical School of Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China.
(2)Department of Thyroid and Breast Surgery, Huai'an Second People's Hospital,
Huai'an, China. (3)Department of General Surgery, Nanjing Medical University
Affiliated Cancer Hospital, Cancer Institute of Jiangsu Province, Nanjing, China.
(4)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Nanjing Medical University Affiliated Huai'an 
First People's Hospital, Huai'an, China. (5)Center of Clinical Laboratory,
Nanjing Medical University Affiliated Cancer Hospital, Cancer Institute of
Jiangsu Province, Nanjing, China. (6)Department of Molecular Cell Biology and
Toxicology, School of Public Health, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China. 
momopannj@sina.com. (7), 42 Baiziting, Nanjing, China. momopannj@sina.com.
(8)Department of General Surgery, Nanjing Medical University Affiliated Cancer
Hospital, Cancer Institute of Jiangsu Province, Nanjing, China. jhtangnj@126.com.
(9), 42 Baiziting, Nanjing, China. jhtangnj@126.com.

While adriamycin (adr) offers improvement in survival for breast cancer (BCa)
patients, unfortunately, drug resistance is almost inevitable. Mounting evidence 
suggests that exosomes act as a vehicle for genetic cargo and constantly shuttle 
biologically active molecules including microRNAs (miRNAs) between heterogeneous 
populations of tumor cells, engendering a resistance-promoting niche for cancer
progression. Our recent study showed that exosomes from docetaxel-resistance BCa 
cells could modulate chemosensitivity by delivering miRNAs. Herein, we expand on 
our previous finding and explore the relevance of exosome-mediated miRNA delivery
in resistance transmission of adr-resistant BCa sublines. We now demonstrated the
selective packing of miRNAs within the exosomes (A/exo) derived from
adr-resistant BCa cells. The highly expressed miRNAs in A/exo were significantly 
increased in recipient fluorescent sensitive cells (GFP-S) after A/exo
incorporation. Gene ontology analysis of predicted targets showed that the top 30
most abundant miRNAs in A/exo were involved in crucial biological processes.
Moreover, A/exo not only loaded miRNAs for its production and release but also
carried miRNAs associated with Wnt signaling pathway. Furthermore, A/exo
co-culture assays indicated that miRNA-containing A/exo was able to increase the 
overall resistance of GFP-S to adr exposure and regulate gene levels in GFP-S.
Our results reinforce our earlier reports that adr-resistant BCa cells could
manipulate a more deleterious microenvironment and transmit resistance capacity
through altering gene expressions in sensitive cells by transferring specific
miRNAs contained within exosomes.

DOI: 10.1007/s13277-015-4402-2 
PMID: 26555545  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Anim Genet. 2015 Dec;46(6):636-45. doi: 10.1111/age.12361. Epub 2015 Oct 12.

De novo transcriptome assembly and identification of genes associated with feed
conversion ratio and breast muscle yield in domestic ducks.

Zhu F(1), Yuan JM(2), Zhang ZH(1), Hao JP(3), Yang YZ(4), Hu SQ(3), Yang FX(3),
Qu LJ(1), Hou ZC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Genetics and Breeding, National Engineering Laboratory
for Animal Breeding and MOA Key Laboratory of Animal Genetics and Breeding, China
Agricultural University, Beijing, 100193, China. (2)Department of Animal
Nutrition, China Agricultural University, Beijing, 100193, China. (3)Beijing
Jinxing Golden Star Duck Center, Beijing, 100076, China. (4)Beijing General
Station of Animal Husbandry, Beijing, 100107, China.

Breast muscle yield and feed conversion efficiency are the major breeding aims in
duck breeding. Understanding the role of specific transcripts in the muscle and
small intestine might lead to the elucidation of interrelated biological
processes. In this study, we obtained jejunum and breast muscle samples from two 
strains of Peking ducks that were sorted by feed conversion ratio (FCR) and
breast muscle percentage into two-tailed populations. Ten RNA-Seq libraries were 
developed from the pooled samples and sequenced using the Hiseq2000 platform. We 
created a reference duck transcript database using de novo assembly methods,
which included 16 663 irredundant contigs with an N50 length of 1530 bp. This new
duck reference cDNA dataset significantly improved the mapping rate for RNA-Seq
data, from 50% to 70%. Mapping and annotation were followed by Gene Ontology
analysis, which showed that numerous genes were differentially expressed between 
the low and high FCR groups. The differentially expressed genes in the jejunum
were enriched in biological processes related to immune response and immune
response activation, whereas those in the breast muscle were significantly
enriched in biological processes related to muscle cell differentiation and organ
development. We identified new candidate genes, that is, PCK1, for improving the 
FCR and breast muscle yield of ducks and obtained much better reference duck
transcripts. This study suggested that de novo assembly is essential when
applying transcriptome analysis to a species with an incomplete genome.

© 2015 Stichting International Foundation for Animal Genetics.

DOI: 10.1111/age.12361 
PMID: 26545935  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Cancer Genomics Proteomics. 2015 Nov-Dec;12(6):347-58.

Doxorubicin Affects Expression of Proteins of Neuronal Pathways in MCF-7 Breast
Cancer Cells.

Petrovic M(1), Simillion C(2), Kruzliak P(3), Sabo J(4), Heller M(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical and Clinical Biophysics, Faculty of Medicine, University
of Pavol Jozef Safarik, Kosice, Slovak Republic Department of Clinical Research, 
Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry Core Facility, University of Bern, Bern,
Switzerland. (2)Department of Clinical Research, Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry
Core Facility, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland. (3)International Clinical
Research Center, St. Anne's University Hospital and Masaryk University, Brno,
Czech Republic. (4)Department of Medical and Clinical Biophysics, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Pavol Jozef Safarik, Kosice, Slovak Republic.
(5)Department of Clinical Research, Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry Core
Facility, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland manfred.heller@dkf.unibe.ch.

In the present article, we report on the semi-quantitative proteome analysis and 
related changes in protein expression of the MCF-7 breast cancer cell line
following treatment with doxorubicin, using the precursor acquisition independent
from ion count (PAcIFIC) mass spectrometry method. PAcIFIC represents a
cost-effective and easy-to-use proteomics approach, enabling for deep proteome
sequencing with minimal sample handling. The acquired proteomic data sets were
searched for regulated Reactome pathways and Gene Ontology annotation terms using
a new algorithm (SetRank). Using this approach, we identified pathways with
significant changes (≤0.05), such as chromatin organization, DNA binding, embryo 
development, condensed chromosome, sequence-specific DNA binding, response to
oxidative stress and response to toxin, as well as others. These sets of pathways
are already well-described as being susceptible to chemotherapeutic drugs.
Additionally, we found pathways related to neuron development, such as central
nervous system neuron differentiation, neuron projection membrane and SNAP
receptor activity. These later pathways might indicate biological mechanisms on
the molecular level causing the known side-effect of doxorubicin chemotherapy,
characterized as cognitive impairment, also called 'chemo brain'. Mass
spectrometry data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD002998.

Copyright© 2015, International Institute of Anticancer Research (Dr. John G.
Delinasios), All rights reserved.


PMID: 26543081  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Gene. 2016 Jan 15;576(1 Pt 3):483-91. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2015.10.059. Epub 2015 
Oct 28.

Expression and DNA methylation alterations of seven cancer-associated 3p genes
and their predicted regulator miRNAs (miR-129-2, miR-9-1) in breast and ovarian
cancers.

Pronina IV(1), Loginov VI(1), Burdennyy AM(1), Fridman MV(1), Kazubskaya TP(2),
Dmitriev AA(3), Braga EA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of General Pathology and Pathophysiology, 125315 Moscow, Russia\
(2)Blokhin Cancer Research Center, 115478 Moscow, Russia. (3)Engelhardt Institute
of Molecular Biology, Russian Academy of Sciences, 119991 Moscow, Russia.
(4)Institute of General Pathology and Pathophysiology, 125315 Moscow, Russia\.
Electronic address: eleonora10_45@mail.ru.

The methylation of promoter CpG islands and interactions between microRNAs
(miRNAs) and messenger RNAs (mRNAs) of target genes are considered two crucial
epigenetic mechanisms for inducing gene and pathway deregulation in tumors. Here,
the expression levels of seven cancer-associated 3p genes (RASSF1(isoform A),
RARB(isoform 2), SEMA3B, RHOA, GPX1, NKIRAS1, and CHL1) and their predicted
regulator miRNAs (miR-129-2, miR-9-1) were analyzed in breast (BC, 40 samples)
and ovarian (OC, 14 samples) cancers using RT-PCR and qPCR. We first revealed a
negative correlation between the level of the miR-129-2 precursor and RASSF1(A)
and GPX1 mRNA levels in BC (Spearman's correlation coefficient (rs) was − 0.26 in
both cases). Similar results were observed for the miR-129-2 precursor and the
RASSF1(A), GPX1, RARB(2), and CHL1 genes in OC (rs was in the range − 0.48 to −
0.54). Using methylation-specific PCR, a significant correlation was shown
between promoter hypermethylation and the down-regulation of the RASSF1(A), GPX1,
RARB(2), SEMA3B, MIR-129-2, and MIR-9-1 genes in BC (rs = 0.41 to 0.75) and of
the RASSF1(A) gene in OC (rs = 0.67). We first demonstrated a high
hypermethylation frequency of MIR-129-2 and SEMA3B (up to 45 to 48%) in both BC
(69 samples) and OC (41 samples). Moreover, we observed a positive correlation
between the hypermethylation of MIR-129-2 and the up-regulation of the RASSF1(A) 
and GPX1 genes in BC (rs = 0.38 and 0.42, respectively). QPCR analysis of the
expression of RASSF1(A) and mature miR-129-2 in additional BC sample set (24
samples) revealed a negative correlation between them (rs = − 0.41) that
strengthened the results obtained during the analysis of miR-129-2 precursor
level. In summary, the obtained data indicate the involvement of methylation in
the down-regulation of the studied coding and miRNA genes and suggest the
involvement of miR-129-2 in the deregulation of RASSF1(A) via a direct
interaction or/and mediators in common pathways (according to KEGG, Gene Ontology
(FDR < 0.01), and GeneCards data) in the examined gynecological tumors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gene.2015.10.059 
PMID: 26519551  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Oncotarget. 2015 Oct 20. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.6194. [Epub ahead of print]

Amplification of ACK1 promotes gastric tumorigenesis via ECDdependent p53
ubiquitination degradation.

Xu SH(1,)(2), Huang JZ(1,)(2), Chen M(1,)(2), Zeng M(1,)(2), Zou FY(1), Chen
D(2,)(3), Yan GR(1,)(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institutes of Life and Health Engineering, Jinan University, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Biomedicine Research Center and Department of Surgery, The Third Affiliated
Hospital of Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, China. (3)Key Laboratory for
Major Obstetric Diseases of Guangdong Province, Key Laboratory of Reproduction
and Genetics of Guangdong Higher Education Institutes, Guangzhou, China.

Amplification or over-expression of an activated Cdc42-associated kinase 1 (ACK1)
gene is common in breast, lung and ovarian cancers. However, little is known
about the role of ACK1 in gastric tumorigenesis. Here, we found that DNA copy
numbers of the ACK1 gene and its mRNA expression levels were significantly
increased in gastric cancer (GC) compared to normal gastric tissues.
Additionally, silencing ACK1 inhibited GC cell proliferation and colony
formation, induced G2/M arrest and cellular apoptosis in vitro, and suppressed
tumor growth in vivo. Gene Ontology annotation revealed that 147 differential
proteins regulated by ACK1 knockdown were closely related with cellular survival.
A cell cycle regulator, ecdysoneless homolog (ECD), was found to be significantly
down-regulated by ACK1 knockdown. Silencing of ECD inhibited colony formation and
induced G2/M arrest and cell apoptosis, which is similar to the effects of ACK1
knockdown. Silencing of ECD did not further enhance the effects of ACK1 knockdown
on G2/M arrest and apoptosis, while silencing of ECD blocked the enhancement of
colony formation by ACK1 over-expression. Over-expression of ACK or ECD promoted 
the ubiquitination of tumor suppressor p53 protein and decreased p53 levels,
while silencing of ACK1 or ECD decreased the p53 ubiquitination level and
increased p53 levels. Silencing of ECD attenuated the ubiquitination enhancement 
of p53 induced by ACK1 over-expression. Collectively, we demonstrate that
amplification of ACK1 promotes gastric tumorigenesis by inducing an ECD-dependent
ubiquitination degradation of p53.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.6194 
PMID: 26498357 


1. Sci Rep. 2015 Oct 22;5:15474. doi: 10.1038/srep15474.

The influence of cancer tissue sampling on the identification of cancer
characteristics.

Xu H(1), Guo X(1), Sun Q(2), Zhang M(1), Qi L(1), Li Y(1), Chen L(1), Gu Y(1),
Guo Z(1,)(3), Zhao W(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Bioinformatics Science and Technology, Harbin Medical University,
Harbin, 150086, China. (2)Genomics Research Center, Harbin Medical University,
Harbin, 150086, China. (3)Key Laboratory of Ministry of Education for
Gastrointestinal Cancer, Department of Bioinformatics, Fujian Medical University,
Fuzhou, 350004, China.

Cancer tissue sampling affects the identification of cancer characteristics. We
aimed to clarify the source of differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in
macro-dissected cancer tissue and develop a robust prognostic signature against
the effects of tissue sampling. For estrogen receptor (ER)+ breast cancer
patients, we identified DEGs in macro-dissected cancer tissues, malignant
epithelial cells and stromal cells, defined as Macro-Dissected-DEGs,
Epithelial-DEGs and Stromal-DEGs, respectively. Comparing Epithelial-DEGs to
Stromal-DEGs (false discovery rate (FDR) < 10%), 86% of the overlapping genes
exhibited consistent dysregulation (defined as Consistent-DEGs), and the other
14% of genes were dysregulated inconsistently (defined as Inconsistent-DEGs). The
consistency score of dysregulation directions between Macro-Dissected-DEGs and
Consistent-DEGs was 91% (P-value < 2.2 × 10(-16), binomial test), whereas the
score was only 52% between Macro-Dissected-DEGs and Inconsistent-DEGs
(P-value = 0.9, binomial test). Among the gene ontology (GO) terms significantly 
enriched in Macro-Dissected-DEGs (FDR < 10%), 18 immune-related terms were
enriched in Inconsistent-DEGs. DEGs associated with proliferation could reflect
common changes of malignant epithelial and stromal cells; DEGs associated with
immune functions are sensitive to the percentage of malignant epithelial cells in
macro-dissected tissues. A prognostic signature which was insensitive to the
cellular composition of macro-dissected tissues was developed and validated for
ER+ breast patients.

DOI: 10.1038/srep15474 
PMCID: PMC4614546
PMID: 26490514  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. J Breast Cancer. 2015 Sep;18(3):235-41. doi: 10.4048/jbc.2015.18.3.235. Epub 2015
Sep 24.

Expression Patterns of Circular RNAs from Primary Kinase Transcripts in the
Mammary Glands of Lactating Rats.

Zhang C(1), Wu H(1), Wang Y(1), Zhao Y(1), Fang X(1), Chen C(1), Chen H(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Science, Jiangsu Normal University, Xuzhou, China.

PURPOSE: Circular RNAs (circRNAs), a novel class of RNAs, perform important
functions in biological processes. However, the role of circRNAs in the mammary
gland remains unknown. The present study is aimed at identifying and
characterizing the circRNAs expressed in the mammary gland of lactating rats.
METHODS: Deep sequencing of RNase R-enriched rat lactating mammary gland samples 
was performed and circRNAs were predicted using a previously reported
computational pipeline. Gene ontology terms of circRNA-producing genes were also 
analyzed.
RESULTS: A total of 6,824 and 4,523 circRNAs were identified from rat mammary
glands at two different lactation stages. Numerous circRNAs were specifically
expressed at different lactation stages, and only 1,314 circRNAs were detected at
both lactation stages. The majority of the candidate circRNAs map to noncoding
intronic and intergenic regions. The results demonstrate a circular preference or
specificity of some genes. DAVID analysis revealed an enrichment of protein
kinases and related proteins among the set of genes encoding circRNAs.
Interestingly, four protein-coding genes (Rev3l, IGSF11, MAML2, and LPP) that
also transcribe high levels of circRNAs have been reported to be involved in
cancer.
CONCLUSION: Our findings provide the basis for comparison between breast cancer
profiles and for selecting representative circRNA candidates for future
functional characterization in breast development and breast cancer.

DOI: 10.4048/jbc.2015.18.3.235 
PMCID: PMC4600687
PMID: 26472973 


1. Biol Open. 2015 Oct 12;4(11):1436-47. doi: 10.1242/bio.014308.

Genome-wide ChIP-seq analysis of human TOP2B occupancy in MCF7 breast cancer
epithelial cells.

Manville CM(1), Smith K(1), Sondka Z(1), Rance H(1), Cockell S(2), Cowell IG(1), 
Lee KC(1), Morris NJ(3), Padget K(4), Jackson GH(5), Austin CA(6).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cellular and Molecular Biosciences, Newcastle University,
Newcastle upon Tyne NE2 4HH, UK. (2)The Bioinformatics Support Unit, Faculty of
Medical Sciences, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne NE2 4HH, UK.
(3)School of Biomedical Sciences, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne NE2
4HH, UK. (4)Department of Applied Biology, Northumbria University, Newcastle upon
Tyne NE1 8ST, UK. (5)Institute for Cellular Medicine, Newcastle University,
Newcastle upon Tyne NE2 4HH, UK. (6)Institute for Cellular and Molecular
Biosciences, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne NE2 4HH, UK
caroline.austin@ncl.ac.uk.

We report the whole genome ChIP seq for human TOP2B from MCF7 cells. Using three 
different peak calling methods, regions of binding were identified in the
presence or absence of the nuclear hormone estradiol, as TOP2B has been reported 
to play a role in ligand-induced transcription. TOP2B peaks were found across the
whole genome, 50% of the peaks fell either within a gene or within 5 kb of a
transcription start site. TOP2B peaks coincident with gene promoters were less
frequently associated with epigenetic features marking active promoters in
estradiol treated than in untreated cells. Significantly enriched transcription
factor motifs within the DNA sequences underlying the peaks were identified.
These included SP1, KLF4, TFAP2A, MYF, REST, CTCF, ESR1 and ESR2. Gene ontology
analysis of genes associated with TOP2B peaks found neuronal development terms
including axonogenesis and axon guidance were significantly enriched. In the
absence of functional TOP2B there are errors in axon guidance in the zebrafish
eye. Specific heparin sulphate structures are involved in retinal axon targeting.
The glycosaminoglycan biosynthesis-heparin sulphate/heparin pathway is
significantly enriched in the TOP2B gene ontology analysis, suggesting changes in
this pathway in the absence of TOP2B may cause the axon guidance faults.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

DOI: 10.1242/bio.014308 
PMCID: PMC4728365
PMID: 26459242 


1. Amino Acids. 2016 Feb;48(2):337-48. doi: 10.1007/s00726-015-2085-z. Epub 2015 Oct
1.

Glutaminase 1 is a potential biomarker for chronic post-surgical pain in the rat 
dorsal spinal cord using differential proteomics.

Wang H(1), Liu W(2), Cai Y(3), Ma L(2), Ma C(4), Luo A(2), Huang Y(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University,
Guangzhou, China. wanght1981@gmail.com. (2)Department of Anesthesiology, Peking
Union Medical College Hospital, Peking Union Medical College, Chinese Academy of 
Medicine Science, Beijing, China. (3)Department of Anesthesiology, Zhujiang
Hospital, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, China. (4)Department of
Anatomy, Histology and Embryology, Peking Union Medical College, School of Basic 
Medicine, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Institute of Basic Medical
Sciences, Beijing, China. (5)Department of Anesthesiology, Peking Union Medical
College Hospital, Peking Union Medical College, Chinese Academy of Medicine
Science, Beijing, China. garybeijing@163.com.

Chronic post-surgical pain (CPSP) is a normal and significant symptom in clinical
surgery, such as breast operation, biliary tract operation, cesarean operation,
uterectomy and thoracic operation. Severe chronic post-surgical pain could
increase post-surgical complications, including myocardial ischemia, respiratory 
insufficiency, pneumonia and thromboembolism. However, the underlying mechanism
is still unknown. Herein, a rat CPSP model was produced via thoracotomy. After
surgery, in an initial study, 5 out of 12 rats after surgery showed a significant
decrease in mechanical withdrawal threshold and/or increase in the number of
acetone-evoked responses, and therefore classified as the CPSP group. The
remaining seven animals were classified as non-CPSP. Subsequently, open-chest
operation was performed on another 30 rats and divided into CPSP and non-CPSP
groups after 21-day observation. Protein expression levels in the dorsal spinal
cord tissue were determined by 12.5 % SDS-PAGE. Finally, differently expressed
proteins were identified by LC MS/MS and analyzed by MASCOT software, followed by
Gene Ontology cluster analysis using PANTHER software. Compared with the non-CPSP
group, 24 proteins were only expressed in the CPSP group and another 23 proteins 
expressed differentially between CPSP and non-CPSP group. Western blot further
confirmed that the expression of glutaminase 1 (GLS1) was significantly higher in
the CPSP than in the non-CPSP group. This study provided a new strategy to
identify the spinal proteins, which may contribute to the development of chronic 
pain using differential proteomics, and suggested that GLS1 may serve as a
potential biomarker for CPSP.

DOI: 10.1007/s00726-015-2085-z 
PMID: 26427714  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. BMC Genomics. 2015 Sep 29;16:735. doi: 10.1186/s12864-015-1899-0.

Next generation sequencing profiling identifies miR-574-3p and miR-660-5p as
potential novel prognostic markers for breast cancer.

Krishnan P(1), Ghosh S(2,)(3), Wang B(4), Li D(5), Narasimhan A(6), Berendt
R(7,)(8), Graham K(9), Mackey JR(10,)(11), Kovalchuk O(12), Damaraju S(13,)(14).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, University of Alberta,
11560-University Avenue, Edmonton, AB, T6G 1Z2, Canada. preethi@ualberta.ca.
(2)Department of Oncology, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada.
Sunita.Ghosh@albertahealthservices.ca. (3)Cross Cancer Institute, Edmonton, AB,
Canada. Sunita.Ghosh@albertahealthservices.ca. (4)Department of Biological
Sciences, University of Lethbridge, Lethbridge, AB, Canada. bo.wang5@uleth.ca.
(5)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Lethbridge, Lethbridge, AB,
Canada. dongping.Li@uleth.ca. (6)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology,
University of Alberta, 11560-University Avenue, Edmonton, AB, T6G 1Z2, Canada.
anarasim@ualberta.ca. (7)Department of Oncology, University of Alberta, Edmonton,
AB, Canada. rberendt@ualberta.ca. (8)Cross Cancer Institute, Edmonton, AB,
Canada. rberendt@ualberta.ca. (9)Department of Oncology, University of Alberta,
Edmonton, AB, Canada. kagraham@ualberta.ca. (10)Department of Oncology,
University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada.
John.Mackey@albertahealthservices.ca. (11)Cross Cancer Institute, Edmonton, AB,
Canada. John.Mackey@albertahealthservices.ca. (12)Department of Biological
Sciences, University of Lethbridge, Lethbridge, AB, Canada.
olga.kovalchuk@uleth.ca. (13)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology,
University of Alberta, 11560-University Avenue, Edmonton, AB, T6G 1Z2, Canada.
sambasivarao.damaraju@albertahealthservices.ca. (14)Cross Cancer Institute,
Edmonton, AB, Canada. sambasivarao.damaraju@albertahealthservices.ca.

BACKGROUND: Prognostication of Breast Cancer (BC) relies largely on traditional
clinical factors and biomarkers such as hormone or growth factor receptors. Due
to their suboptimal specificities, it is challenging to accurately identify the
subset of patients who are likely to undergo recurrence and there remains a major
need for markers of higher utility to guide therapeutic decisions. MicroRNAs
(miRNAs) are small non-coding RNAs that function as post-transcriptional
regulators of gene expression and have shown promise as potential prognostic
markers in several cancer types including BC.
RESULTS: In our study, we sequenced miRNAs from 104 BC samples and 11 apparently 
healthy normal (reduction mammoplasty) breast tissues. We used Case-control (CC) 
and Case-only (CO) statistical paradigm to identify prognostic markers.
Cox-proportional hazards regression model was employed and risk score analysis
was performed to identify miRNA signature independent of potential confounders.
Representative miRNAs were validated using qRT-PCR. Gene targets for prognostic
miRNAs were identified using in silico predictions and in-house BC transcriptome 
dataset. Gene ontology terms were identified using DAVID bioinformatics v6.7. A
total of 1,423 miRNAs were captured. In the CC approach, 126 miRNAs were retained
with predetermined criteria for good read counts, from which 80 miRNAs were
differentially expressed. Of these, four and two miRNAs were significant for
Overall Survival (OS) and Recurrence Free Survival (RFS), respectively. In the CO
approach, from 147 miRNAs retained after filtering, 11 and 4 miRNAs were
significant for OS and RFS, respectively. In both the approaches, the risk scores
were significant after adjusting for potential confounders. The miRNAs associated
with OS identified in our cohort were validated using an external dataset from
The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) project. Targets for the identified miRNAs were
enriched for cell proliferation, invasion and migration.
CONCLUSIONS: The study identified twelve non-redundant miRNAs associated with OS 
and/or RFS. These signatures include those that were reported by others in BC or 
other cancers. Importantly we report for the first time two new candidate miRNAs 
(miR-574-3p and miR-660-5p) as promising prognostic markers. Independent
validation of signatures (for OS) using an external dataset from TCGA further
strengthened the study findings.

DOI: 10.1186/s12864-015-1899-0 
PMCID: PMC4587870
PMID: 26416693  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. J Cell Mol Med. 2015 Dec;19(12):2874-87. doi: 10.1111/jcmm.12681. Epub 2015 Sep
28.

Analysis of the miRNA-mRNA-lncRNA networks in ER+ and ER- breast cancer cell
lines.

Wu Q(1,)(2,)(3), Guo L(4), Jiang F(5), Li L(2), Li Z(5), Chen F(4).

Author information: 
(1)The State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Nanjing Medical University,
Nanjing, China. (2)Department of Hygienic Analysis and Detection, School of
Public Health, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China. (3)Department of
Enviromental Health Sciences, Bloomburg School of Public Health, Johns Hopkins
University, Baltimore, MD, USA. (4)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics
and Ministry of Education Key Lab for Modern Toxicology, School of Public Health,
Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China. (5)Department of Nutrition and Food
Hygiene and Ministry of Education Key Lab for Modern Toxicology, School of Public
Health, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China.

Recently, rapid advances in bioinformatics analysis have expanded our
understanding of the transcriptome to a genome-wide level. miRNA-mRNA-lncRNA
interactions have been shown to play critical regulatory role in cancer biology. 
In this study, we discussed the use of an integrated systematic approach to
explore new facets of the oestrogen receptor (ER)-regulated transcriptome. The
identification of RNAs that are related to the expression status of the ER may be
useful in clinical therapy and prognosis. We used a network modelling strategy.
First, microarray expression profiling of mRNA, lncRNA and miRNA was performed in
MCF-7 (ER-positive) and MDA-MB-231 cells (ER- negative). A co-expression network 
was then built using co-expression relationships of the differentially expressed 
mRNAs and lncRNAs. Finally, the selected miRNA-mRNA network was added to the
network. The key miRNA-mRNA-lncRNA interaction can be inferred from the network. 
The mRNA and non-coding RNA expression profiles of the cells with different ER
phenotypes were distinct. Among the aberrantly expressed miRNAs, the expression
levels of miR-19a-3p, miR-19b-3p and miR-130a-3p were much lower in the MCF-7
cells, whereas that of miR-148b-3p was much higher. In a cluster of miR-17-92,
the expression levels of six of seven miRNAs were lower in the MCF-7 cells, in
addition to miR-20b in the miR-106a-363 cluster. However, the levels of all the
miRNAs in the miR-106a-25 cluster were higher in the MCF-7 cells. In the
co-expression networking, CD74 and FMNL2 gene which is involved in the immune
response and metastasis, respectively, had a stronger correlation with ER. Among 
the aberrantly expressed lncRNAs, lncRNA-DLEU1 was highly expressed in the MCF-7 
cells. A statistical analysis revealed that there was a co-expression
relationship between ESR1 and lncRNA-DLEU1. In addition, miR-19a and lncRNA-DLEU1
are both located on the human chromosome 13q. We speculate that miR-19a might be 
co-expressed with lncRNA-DLEU1 to co-regulate the expression of ESR1, which
influences the occurrence and development of breast cancer cells with different
levels of ER expression. Our findings reveal that the status of ER is mainly due 
to the differences in the mRNA and ncRNA profile between the breast cancer cell
lines, and highlight the importance of studying the miRNA-mRNA-lncRNA
interactions to completely illustrate the intricate transcriptome.

© 2015 The Authors. Journal of Cellular and Molecular Medicine published by John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd and Foundation for Cellular and Molecular Medicine.

DOI: 10.1111/jcmm.12681 
PMCID: PMC4687702
PMID: 26416600  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Gene. 2016 Jan 10;575(2 Pt 3):600-14. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2015.09.025. Epub 2015 
Sep 25.

Systematically identify key genes in inflammatory and non-inflammatory breast
cancer.

Chai F(1), Liang Y(1), Zhang F(1), Wang M(1), Zhong L(1), Jiang J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Breast Disease Center, Southwest Hospital, Third Military Medical University, 
Chongqing 400038, PR China. (2)Breast Disease Center, Southwest Hospital, Third
Military Medical University, Chongqing 400038, PR China. Electronic address:
jiangjunchq@163.com.

Although the gene expression in breast tumor stroma, playing a critical role in
determining inflammatory breast cancer (IBC) phenotype, has been proved to be
significantly different between IBC and non-inflammatory breast cancer (non-IBC),
more effort needs to systematically investigate the gene expression profiles
between tumor epithelium and stroma and to efficiently uncover the potential
molecular networks and critical genes for IBC and non-IBC. Here, we
comprehensively analyzed and compared the transcriptional profiles from IBC and
non-IBC patients using hierarchical clustering, protein-protein interaction (PPI)
network, Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG)
database analyses, and identified PDGFRβ, SUMO1, COL1A1, FYN, CAV1, COL5A1 and
MMP2 to be the key genes for breast cancer. Interestingly, PDGFRβ was found to be
the hub gene in both IBC and non-IBC; SUMO1 and COL1A1 were respectively the key 
genes for IBC and non-IBC. These analysis results indicated that those key genes 
might play important role in IBC and non-IBC and provided some clues for future
studies.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gene.2015.09.025 
PMID: 26403314  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Int J Surg. 2015 Nov;23(Pt A):28-34. doi: 10.1016/j.ijsu.2015.09.049. Epub 2015
Sep 25.

Gene expression profile of necrotizing enterocolitis model in neonatal mice.

Jung K(1), Kim JH(2), Cheong HS(3), Shin E(4), Kim SH(1), Hwang JY(5), Lee E(1), 
Yoon MO(1), Kim SH(1), Sio CA(1), Shin HD(6), Jung SE(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Seoul National University Bundang Hospital, Seongnam,
Gyeonggi, 463-707, Republic of Korea. (2)Research Institute for Basic Science,
Sogang University, Seoul, 121-742, Republic of Korea. (3)Department of Genetic
Epidemiology, SNP Genetics, Inc., Seoul 153-803, Republic of Korea. (4)Department
of Pathology, Seoul National University Bundang Hospital, Seongnam, Gyeonggi,
463-707, Republic of Korea. (5)Preclinical Experimental Center, Seoul National
University Bundang Hospital, Seongnam, Gyeonggi, 463-707, Republic of Korea.
(6)Research Institute for Basic Science, Sogang University, Seoul, 121-742,
Republic of Korea; Department of Life Science, Sogang University, Seoul 121-742, 
Republic of Korea. Electronic address: hdshin@sogang.ac.kr. (7)Department of
Surgery, Seoul National University Children's Hospital, Seoul 110-773, Republic
of Korea. Electronic address: sejung@snu.ac.kr.

BACKGROUND: Necrotizing enterocolitis (NEC) characterized by intestinal necrosis 
is one of the most common gastrointestinal emergencies in newborns. The main
purpose of this study was to evaluate the whole genome expression levels in a NEC
mouse model controlled with breast milk.
METHODS: This study induced a NEC model in mice of gestational ages of 18-21 days
by intensive hypoxic insult and permitted breast-feeding instead of formula
feeding. After evaluating the NEC status in the small intestines of neonatal mice
by histological examination, a genome-wide gene expression profile study was
completed using microarray analysis.
RESULTS: A total of 72 genes (38 down-regulated and 34 up-regulated) were
observed to have significantly different expression profiles in the NEC mouse
model compared with the normal control animals, based on a significance at fold
change ≥ 2 and P < 0.05. In particular, down-regulated Hist1h2aa and up-regulated
Ube2i showed the most significant signals (P = 0.0008 for both genes). In an
additional gene ontology analysis, the endopeptidase related categories
(specifically, serine-type endopeptidase inhibitor activity, P = 8.95 × 10(-5);
Pcorr = 0.008) appeared to affect NEC development in the mouse model.
CONCLUSION: Although replications and functional evaluations are needed, our
results suggest that several genes may have different expression profiles in the 
NEC mouse model. In particular, endopeptidase related genes (which are also known
to be relevant to NEC), as identified through gene ontology analysis, may
represent attractive targets for future research.

Copyright © 2015 IJS Publishing Group Limited. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijsu.2015.09.049 
PMID: 26403067  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. J Proteomics. 2016 Jan 1;130:200-10. doi: 10.1016/j.jprot.2015.09.024. Epub 2015 
Sep 21.

Characterization of the bovine milk proteome in early-lactation Holstein and
Jersey breeds of dairy cows.

Tacoma R(1), Fields J(2), Ebenstein DB(1), Lam YW(2), Greenwood SL(3).

Author information: 
(1)The University of Vermont, Department of Animal & Veterinary Sciences, 570
Main Street, Burlington, VT 05405, United States. (2)The University of Vermont,
Vermont Genetics Network Proteomics Facility, 109 Carrigan Drive, Burlington, VT 
05405, United States. (3)The University of Vermont, Department of Animal &
Veterinary Sciences, 570 Main Street, Burlington, VT 05405, United States.
Electronic address: Sabrina.Greenwood@uvm.edu.

Milk is a highly nutritious natural product that provides not only a rich source 
of amino acids to the consumer but also hundreds of bioactive peptides and
proteins known to elicit health-benefitting activities. We investigated the milk 
protein profile produced by Holstein and Jersey dairy cows maintained under the
same diet, management and environmental conditions using proteomic approaches
that optimize protein extraction and characterization of the low abundance
proteins within the skim milk fraction of bovine milk. In total, 935 low
abundance proteins were identified. Gene ontology classified all proteins
identified into various cellular localization and function categories. A total of
43 low abundance proteins were differentially expressed between the two dairy
breeds. Bioactive proteins involved in host-defense, including lactotransferrin
(P=0.0026) and complement C2 protein (P=0.0001), were differentially expressed by
the two breeds, whereas others such as osteopontin (P=0.1788) and lactoperoxidase
(P=0.2973) were not. This work is the first to outline the protein profile
produced by two important breeds of dairy cattle maintained under the same diet, 
environment and management conditions in order to observe likely true breed
differences. This research now allows us to better understand and contrast
further research examining the bovine proteome that includes these different
breeds.BIOLOGICAL SIGNIFICANCE: Within the last decade, the amount of research
characterizing the bovine milk proteome has increased due to growing interest in 
the bioactive proteins that are present in milk. Proteomic analysis of low
abundance whey proteins has mainly focused on human breast milk; however,
previous research has highlighted the presence of bioactive proteins in bovine
milk. Recent publications outlining the cross-reactivity of bovine bioactive
proteins on human biological function highlight the need for further
investigation into the bovine milk proteome. The rationale behind this study is
to characterize and compare the low abundance protein profile in the skim milk
fraction produced from Holstein and Jersey breeds of dairy cattle, which are two 
major dairy cattle breeds in the USA. A combination of fractionation strategies
was used to efficiently enrich the low abundance proteins from bovine skim milk
for proteomic profiling. A total of 935 low abundance proteins were identified
and compared between the two bovine breeds. The results from this study provide
insight into breed differences and similarities in the milk proteome profile
produced by two breeds of dairy cattle.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jprot.2015.09.024 
PMCID: PMC4859431
PMID: 26391770  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Amino Acids. 2016 Feb;48(2):365-74. doi: 10.1007/s00726-015-2089-8. Epub 2015 Sep
15.

Proteomic analysis of O-GlcNAcylated proteins in invasive ductal breast
carcinomas with and without lymph node metastasis.

Jiang K(1), Gao Y(2), Hou W(3), Tian F(4), Ying W(4), Li L(1), Bai B(1), Hou
G(5), Wang PG(6), Zhang L(7).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Medicinal Chemical Biology and College of Pharmacy,
Collaborative Innovation Center for Biotherapy, and Tianjin Key Laboratory of
Molecular Drug Research, Nankai University, Tianjin, 300071, China. (2)School of 
Medicine, Nankai University, Tianjin, 300071, China. (3)Department of Pathology, 
The Central Hospital of Taian, 29 Longtan Road, Taian, 271000, China. (4)State
Key Laboratory of Proteomics, Beijing Proteome Research Center, Beijing Institute
of Radiation Medicine, Beijing, 102206, China. (5)Department of Pathology, The
Central Hospital of Taian, 29 Longtan Road, Taian, 271000, China.
hougang5586@126.com. (6)State Key Laboratory of Medicinal Chemical Biology and
College of Pharmacy, Collaborative Innovation Center for Biotherapy, and Tianjin 
Key Laboratory of Molecular Drug Research, Nankai University, Tianjin, 300071,
China. pwang@nankai.edu.cn. (7)State Key Laboratory of Medicinal Chemical Biology
and College of Pharmacy, Collaborative Innovation Center for Biotherapy, and
Tianjin Key Laboratory of Molecular Drug Research, Nankai University, Tianjin,
300071, China. lianwen@nankai.edu.cn.

The potential role of protein O-GlcNAcylation in cancer has been studied
extensively, and the spread of cancer cells to regional lymph nodes is the first 
step in the dissemination of breast cancer. However, the correlation between
O-GlcNAcylation and lymphatic metastasis in breast cancer remains elusive. In
this study, we demonstrated that the overall O-GlcNAcylation as well as O-GlcNAc 
transferase (OGT) tends to decrease in response to the augmentation of lymph node
metastasis (LNM) in invasive ductal breast carcinomas (IDCs). Although
accumulating evidence indicates that individual O-GlcNAcylation may be important 
in the pathogenesis of breast cancer, O-GlcNAcylated proteins in IDCs are still
largely unexplored. Herein, O-GlcNAcylated proteins of IDCs were
chemo-enzymatically enriched and identified via liquid chromatography combined
with tandem mass spectrometry. In total, 155 O-GlcNAcylated proteins were
determined, of which 41 were only observed in LNM tissues, while 40 were unique
in non-LNM samples. Gene ontology analysis showed that O-GlcNAc is primarily a
nucleocytoplasmic post-translational modification, and most enriched functional
terms were related to cancer development in both metastatic and non-metastatic
IDCs. Moreover, several O-GlcNAcylated proteins involved in glycolysis and its
accessory pathway were identified from LNM and non-LNM groups, respectively.
These results indicate that the O-GlcNAcylation statuses of individual proteins
were independent of the overall O-GlcNAcylation levels of metastatic and
non-metastatic IDCs. Aberrant O-GlcNAc modification of these proteins might be
associated with LNM progression.

DOI: 10.1007/s00726-015-2089-8 
PMID: 26374642  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Tumour Biol. 2016 Feb;37(2):2285-97. doi: 10.1007/s13277-015-4033-7. Epub 2015
Sep 11.

Identification of novel therapeutic target genes in acquired lapatinib-resistant 
breast cancer by integrative meta-analysis.

Lee YS(1), Hwang SG(2), Kim JK(1), Park TH(3), Kim YR(1), Myeong HS(1), Choi
JD(1), Kwon K(4), Jang CS(2), Ro YT(1), Noh YH(1), Kim SY(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Medicine, Konkuk University, Seoul,
143-701, Republic of Korea. (2)Plant Genomics Laboratory, Department of Applied
Plant Science, Kangwon National University, Chuncheon, Republic of Korea.
(3)Department of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, College of Medicine, Yonsei 
University, Seoul, Republic of Korea. (4)School of Korean Medicine, Pusan
National University, Yangsan, Republic of Korea. (5)Department of Biochemistry,
School of Medicine, Konkuk University, Seoul, 143-701, Republic of Korea.
palelamp@kku.ac.kr.

Acquired resistance to lapatinib is a highly problematic clinical barrier that
has to be overcome for a successful cancer treatment. Despite efforts to
determine the mechanisms underlying acquired lapatinib resistance (ALR), no
definitive genetic factors have been reported to be solely responsible for the
acquired resistance in breast cancer. Therefore, we performed a cross-platform
meta-analysis of three publically available microarray datasets related to breast
cancer with ALR, using the R-based RankProd package. From the meta-analysis, we
were able to identify a total of 990 differentially expressed genes (DEGs, 406
upregulated, 584 downregulated) that are potentially associated with ALR. Gene
ontology (GO) function and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway
enrichment analysis of the DEGs showed that "response to organic substance" and
"p53 signaling pathway" may be largely involved in ALR process. Of these, many of
the top 50 upregulated and downregulated DEGs were found in oncogenesis of
various tumors and cancers. For the top 50 DEGs, we constructed the gene
coexpression and protein-protein interaction networks from a huge database of
well-known molecular interactions. By integrative analysis of two systemic
networks, we condensed the total number of DEGs to six common genes (LGALS1,
PRSS23, PTRF, FHL2, TOB1, and SOCS2). Furthermore, these genes were confirmed in 
functional module eigens obtained from the weighted gene correlation network
analysis of total DEGs in the microarray datasets ("GSE16179" and "GSE52707").
Our integrative meta-analysis could provide a comprehensive perspective into
complex mechanisms underlying ALR in breast cancer and a theoretical support for 
further chemotherapeutic studies.

DOI: 10.1007/s13277-015-4033-7 
PMID: 26361955  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Int J Mol Sci. 2015 Jul 17;16(7):16242-62. doi: 10.3390/ijms160716242.

Deep Sequencing Analysis of miRNA Expression in Breast Muscle of Fast-Growing and
Slow-Growing Broilers.

Ouyang H(1,)(2), He X(3,)(4), Li G(5,)(6), Xu H(7,)(8), Jia X(9,)(10), Nie
Q(11,)(12), Zhang X(13,)(14).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Genetics, Breeding and Reproduction, College of Animal
Science, South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou 510642, China.
oyolive@stu.scau.edu.cn. (2)Guangdong Provincial Key Lab of Agro-Animal Genomics 
and Molecular Breeding and Key Lab of Chicken Genetics, Breeding and
Reproduction, Ministry of Agriculture, Guangzhou 510642, China.
oyolive@stu.scau.edu.cn. (3)Department of Animal Genetics, Breeding and
Reproduction, College of Animal Science, South China Agricultural University,
Guangzhou 510642, China. 13533993199@163.com. (4)Guangdong Provincial Key Lab of 
Agro-Animal Genomics and Molecular Breeding and Key Lab of Chicken Genetics,
Breeding and Reproduction, Ministry of Agriculture, Guangzhou 510642, China.
13533993199@163.com. (5)Department of Animal Genetics, Breeding and Reproduction,
College of Animal Science, South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou 510642,
China. yunturn@126.com. (6)Guangdong Provincial Key Lab of Agro-Animal Genomics
and Molecular Breeding and Key Lab of Chicken Genetics, Breeding and
Reproduction, Ministry of Agriculture, Guangzhou 510642, China. yunturn@126.com. 
(7)Department of Animal Genetics, Breeding and Reproduction, College of Animal
Science, South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou 510642, China.
music-three@163.com. (8)Guangdong Provincial Key Lab of Agro-Animal Genomics and 
Molecular Breeding and Key Lab of Chicken Genetics, Breeding and Reproduction,
Ministry of Agriculture, Guangzhou 510642, China. music-three@163.com.
(9)Department of Animal Genetics, Breeding and Reproduction, College of Animal
Science, South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou 510642, China.
xinzhengjia@126.com. (10)Guangdong Provincial Key Lab of Agro-Animal Genomics and
Molecular Breeding and Key Lab of Chicken Genetics, Breeding and Reproduction,
Ministry of Agriculture, Guangzhou 510642, China. xinzhengjia@126.com.
(11)Department of Animal Genetics, Breeding and Reproduction, College of Animal
Science, South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou 510642, China.
nqinghua@scau.edu.cn. (12)Guangdong Provincial Key Lab of Agro-Animal Genomics
and Molecular Breeding and Key Lab of Chicken Genetics, Breeding and
Reproduction, Ministry of Agriculture, Guangzhou 510642, China.
nqinghua@scau.edu.cn. (13)Department of Animal Genetics, Breeding and
Reproduction, College of Animal Science, South China Agricultural University,
Guangzhou 510642, China. xqzhang@scau.edu.cn. (14)Guangdong Provincial Key Lab of
Agro-Animal Genomics and Molecular Breeding and Key Lab of Chicken Genetics,
Breeding and Reproduction, Ministry of Agriculture, Guangzhou 510642, China.
xqzhang@scau.edu.cn.

Growth performance is an important economic trait in chicken. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) 
have been shown to play important roles in various biological processes, but
their functions in chicken growth are not yet clear. To investigate the function 
of miRNAs in chicken growth, breast muscle tissues of the two-tail samples
(highest and lowest body weight) from Recessive White Rock (WRR) and Xinghua
Chickens (XH) were performed on high throughput small RNA deep sequencing. In
this study, a total of 921 miRNAs were identified, including 733 known mature
miRNAs and 188 novel miRNAs. There were 200, 279, 257 and 297 differentially
expressed miRNAs in the comparisons of WRRh vs. WRRl, WRRh vs. XHh, WRRl vs. XHl,
and XHh vs. XHl group, respectively. A total of 22 highly differentially
expressed miRNAs (fold change > 2 or < 0.5; p-value < 0.05; q-value < 0.01),
which also have abundant expression (read counts > 1000) were found in our
comparisons. As far as two analyses (WRRh vs. WRRl, and XHh vs. XHl) are
concerned, we found 80 common differentially expressed miRNAs, while 110 miRNAs
were found in WRRh vs. XHh and WRRl vs. XHl. Furthermore, 26 common miRNAs were
identified among all four comparisons. Four differentially expressed miRNAs
(miR-223, miR-16, miR-205a and miR-222b-5p) were validated by quantitative
real-time RT-PCR (qRT-PCR). Regulatory networks of interactions among miRNAs and 
their targets were constructed using integrative miRNA target-prediction and
network-analysis. Growth hormone receptor (GHR) was confirmed as a target of
miR-146b-3p by dual-luciferase assay and qPCR, indicating that miR-34c, miR-223, 
miR-146b-3p, miR-21 and miR-205a are key growth-related target genes in the
network. These miRNAs are proposed as candidate miRNAs for future studies
concerning miRNA-target function on regulation of chicken growth.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms160716242 
PMCID: PMC4519947
PMID: 26193261  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Cancer Biol Ther. 2015;16(8):1241-51. doi: 10.1080/15384047.2015.1056411. Epub
2015 Jul 6.

UHRF1 promotes proliferation of gastric cancer via mediating tumor suppressor
gene hypermethylation.

Zhou L(1), Shang Y, Jin Z, Zhang W, Lv C, Zhao X, Liu Y, Li N, Liang J.

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Medical Affairs ; The 88th Hospital of PLA ; Tai'an , China.

Epigenetic changes play significant roles in cancer development. UHRF1, an
epigenetic regulator, has been shown to be overexpressed and to coordinate tumor 
suppressor gene (TSG) silencing in several cancers. In a previous study, we found
that UHRF1 promoted gastric cancer (GC) invasion and metastasis. However, the
role and underlying mechanism of UHRF1 in GC carcinogenesis remain largely
unknown. In the present study, we investigated UHRF1 expression and function in
GC proliferation and explored its downstream regulatory mechanism. The results
demonstrated that UHRF1 overexpression was an independent and significant
predictor of GC prognosis. Downregulation of UHRF1 suppressed GC proliferation
and growth in vitro and in vivo, and UHRF1 upregulation showed opposite effects. 
Furthermore, downregulation of UHRF1 reactivated 7 TSGs, including CDX2, CDKN2A, 
RUNX3, FOXO4, PPARG, BRCA1 and PML, via promoter demethylation. These results
provide insight into the GC proliferation process, and suggest that targeting
UHRF1 represents a new therapeutic approach to block GC development.

DOI: 10.1080/15384047.2015.1056411 
PMCID: PMC4622020
PMID: 26147747  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Oncol Lett. 2015 Jun;9(6):2560-2566. Epub 2015 Apr 23.

Integrated analysis of differentially expressed genes in breast cancer
pathogenesis.

Chen D(1), Yang H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Breast Surgery, Zhejiang Cancer Hospital, Hangzhou, Zhejiang
310022, P.R. China.

The present study aimed to detect the differences between breast cancer cells and
normal breast cells, and investigate the potential pathogenetic mechanisms of
breast cancer. The sample GSE9574 series was downloaded, and the microarray data 
was analyzed to identify differentially expressed genes (DEGs). Gene Ontology
(GO) cluster analysis using the GO Enrichment Analysis Software Toolkit platform 
and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway analysis for DEGs was 
conducted using the Gene Set Analysis Toolkit V2. In addition, a protein-protein 
interaction (PPI) network was constructed, and target sites of potential
transcription factors and potential microRNA (miRNA) molecules were screened. A
total of 106 DEGs were identified in the current study. Based on these DEGs, a
number of bio-pathways appear to be altered in breast cancer, including a number 
of signaling pathways and other disease-associated pathways, as indicated by KEGG
pathway clustering analysis. ATF3, JUND, FOSB and JUNB were detected in the PPI
network. Finally, the most significant potential target sites of transcription
factors and miRNAs in breast cancer, which are important in the regulation of
gene expression, were identified. The results indicated that miR-93, miR-302A,
miR-302B, miR-302C, miR-302D, miR-372, miR-373, miR-520E and miR-520A were
closely associated with the occurrence and development of breast cancer.
Therefore, changes in the expression of these miRNAs may alter cell metabolism
and trigger the development of breast cancer and its complications.

DOI: 10.3892/ol.2015.3147 
PMCID: PMC4473354
PMID: 26137106 


1. PLoS One. 2015 Jun 23;10(6):e0129842. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0129842.
eCollection 2015.

Molecular Features of Triple Negative Breast Cancer: Microarray Evidence and
Further Integrated Analysis.

He J(1), Yang J(2), Chen W(1), Wu H(1), Yuan Z(1), Wang K(1), Li G(1), Sun J(1), 
Yu L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Breast Surgery, The first affiliated hospital of Shenzhen
university, the Second People's Hospital of Shenzhen, Shenzhen 518035, China.
(2)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Masonic Cancer Center,
University of Minnesota, UMN Twin Cities, Minneapolis 55455, Minnesota, United
States of America.

PURPOSE: Breast cancer is a heterogeneous disease usually including four
molecular subtypes such as luminal A, luminal B, HER2-enriched, and
triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC). TNBC is more aggressive than other breast
cancer subtypes. Despite major advances in ER-positive or HER2-amplified breast
cancer, there is no targeted agent currently available for TNBC, so it is urgent 
to identify new potential therapeutic targets for TNBC.
METHODS: We first used microarray analysis to compare gene expression profiling
between TNBC and non-TNBC. Furthermore an integrated analysis was conducted based
on our own and published data, leading to more robust, reproducible and accurate 
predictions. Additionally, we performed qRT-PCR in breast cancer cell lines to
verify the findings in integrated analysis.
RESULTS: After searching Gene Expression Omnibus database (GEO), two microarray
studies were obtained according to the inclusion criteria. The integrated
analysis was conducted, including 30 samples of TNBC and 77 samples of non-TNBC. 
556 genes were found to be consistently differentially expressed (344
up-regulated genes and 212 down-regulated genes in TNBC). Functional annotation
for these differentially expressed genes (DEGs) showed that the most
significantly enriched Gene Ontology (GO) term for molecular functions was
protein binding (GO: 0005515, P = 6.09E-21), while that for biological processes 
was signal transduction (GO: 0007165, P = 9.46E-08), and that for cellular
component was cytoplasm (GO: 0005737, P = 2.09E-21). The most significant pathway
was Pathways in cancer (P = 6.54E-05) based on Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and
Genomes (KEGG). DUSP1 (Degree = 21), MYEOV2 (Degree = 15) and UQCRQ (Degree = 14)
were identified as the significant hub proteins in the protein-protein
interaction (PPI) network. Five genes were selected to perform qRT-PCR in seven
breast cancer cell lines, and qRT-PCR results showed that the expression pattern 
of selected genes in TNBC lines and non-TNBC lines was nearly consistent with
that in the integrated analysis.
CONCLUSION: This study may help to understand the pathogenesis of different
breast cancer subtypes, contributing to the successful identification of
therapeutic targets for TNBC.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0129842 
PMCID: PMC4478040
PMID: 26103053  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. BMC Med Genomics. 2015;8 Suppl 2:S3. doi: 10.1186/1755-8794-8-S2-S3. Epub 2015
May 29.

Identification association of drug-disease by using functional gene module for
breast cancer.

Zhu L, Zhu F.

In oncology drug development, it is important to develop low risk drugs
efficiently. Meanwhile, computational methods have been paid more and more
attention in drug discovery. However, few studies attempt to discover the mutual 
gene modules shared by the drug and disease association. Here we introduce a
novel method to identify repositioned drug for breast cancer by integrating the
breast cancer survival data with the drug sensitivity information. Among the 140 
drug candidates, we are able to filter 4 FDA approved drugs and identify 2 breast
cancer drugs among 4 known breast cancer therapeutic drug in total.

DOI: 10.1186/1755-8794-8-S2-S3 
PMCID: PMC4460962
PMID: 26045063  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Cancer Biol Ther. 2015;16(6):856-65. doi: 10.1080/15384047.2015.1040957.

Microarray expression profiling of dysregulated long non-coding RNAs in
triple-negative breast cancer.

Chen C(1), Li Z, Yang Y, Xiang T, Song W, Liu S.

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Surgery ; The First Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical
University ; Chongqing , China.

Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) represents a collection of malignant breast 
tumors that are often aggressive and have an increased risk of metastasis and
relapse. Long non-coding RNAs are generally defined as RNA transcripts measuring 
200 nucleotides or longer that do not encode for any protein. During the past
decade, increasing evidence has shown that lncRNAs play important roles in
oncogenesis and tumor suppression; however, the roles of lncRNAs in TNBC are
poorly understood. To address this issue, we used Agilent human lncRNA microarray
chips and bioinformatics tools, including Gene Ontology (GO) and the Kyoto
Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG), to assess lncRNA expression in 3 pairs 
of TNBC tissues. A dysregulated lncRNA expression profile was identified by
microarray and verified by qRT-PCR in 48 pairs of breast cancer subtype tissues. 
Metastasis is the major cause of cancer-related deaths, including those in TNBC, 
and the presence of dormant residual disseminated tumor cells (DTC) may be a key 
factor leading to metastasis. ANKRD30A, a potential target for breast cancer
immunotherapy, is currently one of the most used DTC markers. Notably, we found
the expression levels of the novel intergenic lncRNA LINC00993 to be associated
with the expression levels of ANKRD30A. Furthermore, our qRT-PCR data indicated
that the expression of LINC00993 was also associated with the expression of the
estrogen receptor. In conclusion, our study identified a set of lncRNAs that were
consistently aberrantly expressed in TNBC, and these dysregulated lncRNAs may be 
involved in the development and/or progression of TNBC.

DOI: 10.1080/15384047.2015.1040957 
PMCID: PMC4622574
PMID: 25996380  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Methods Mol Biol. 2016;1375:105-16. doi: 10.1007/7651_2015_241.

Using Semantic Similarities and csbl.go for Analyzing Microarray Data.

Ovaska K(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of Helsinki, Biomedicum Helsinki (B524a), 63, 00014, Helsinki,
Finland. kristian.ovaska@iki.fi.

Cellular phenotypes result from the combined effect of multiple genes, and
high-throughput techniques such as DNA microarrays and deep sequencing allow
monitoring this genomic complexity. The large scale of the resulting data,
however, creates challenges for interpreting results, as primary analysis often
yields hundreds of genes. Gene Ontology (GO), a controlled vocabulary for gene
products, enables semantic analysis of such gene sets. GO can be used to define
semantic similarity between genes, which enables semantic clustering to reduce
the complexity of a result set. Here, we describe how to compute semantic
similarities and perform GO-based gene clustering using csbl.go, an R package for
GO semantic similarity. We demonstrate the approach with expression profiles from
breast cancer.

DOI: 10.1007/7651_2015_241 
PMID: 25971911  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. PLoS One. 2015 May 6;10(5):e0126283. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0126283.
eCollection 2015.

Assembly of a comprehensive regulatory network for the mammalian circadian clock:
a bioinformatics approach.

Lehmann R(1), Childs L(2), Thomas P(2), Abreu M(3), Fuhr L(3), Herzel H(1), Leser
U(2), Relógio A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Theoretical Biology (ITB), Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin
and Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Invalidenstraße 43, 10115, Berlin, Germany.
(2)Knowledge Management in Bioinformatics, Institute for Computer Science,
Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Unter den Linden 6, 10099, Berlin, Germany.
(3)Institute for Theoretical Biology (ITB), Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin
and Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Invalidenstraße 43, 10115, Berlin, Germany;
Molekulares Krebsforschungszentrum (MKFZ), Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin,
Augustenburger Platz 1, 13353, Berlin, Germany.

By regulating the timing of cellular processes, the circadian clock provides a
way to adapt physiology and behaviour to the geophysical time. In mammals, a
light-entrainable master clock located in the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN)
controls peripheral clocks that are present in virtually every body cell.
Defective circadian timing is associated with several pathologies such as cancer 
and metabolic and sleep disorders. To better understand the circadian regulation 
of cellular processes, we developed a bioinformatics pipeline encompassing the
analysis of high-throughput data sets and the exploitation of published knowledge
by text-mining. We identified 118 novel potential clock-regulated genes and
integrated them into an existing high-quality circadian network, generating the
to-date most comprehensive network of circadian regulated genes (NCRG). To
validate particular elements in our network, we assessed publicly available
ChIP-seq data for BMAL1, REV-ERBα/β and RORα/γ proteins and found strong evidence
for circadian regulation of Elavl1, Nme1, Dhx6, Med1 and Rbbp7 all of which are
involved in the regulation of tumourigenesis. Furthermore, we identified Ncl and 
Ddx6, as targets of RORγ and REV-ERBα, β, respectively. Most interestingly, these
genes were also reported to be involved in miRNA regulation; in particular, NCL
regulates several miRNAs, all involved in cancer aggressiveness. Thus, NCL
represents a novel potential link via which the circadian clock, and specifically
RORγ, regulates the expression of miRNAs, with particular consequences in breast 
cancer progression. Our findings bring us one step forward towards a mechanistic 
understanding of mammalian circadian regulation, and provide further evidence of 
the influence of circadian deregulation in cancer.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0126283 
PMCID: PMC4422523
PMID: 25945798  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2015 Aug 15;411:75-85. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2015.04.013. Epub 
2015 Apr 24.

A novel Anxa2-interacting protein Ebp1 inhibits cancer proliferation and invasion
by suppressing Anxa2 protein level.

Zhang F(1), Liu Y(2), Wang Z(2), Sun X(2), Yuan J(2), Wang T(2), Tian R(2), Ji
W(2), Yu M(3), Zhao Y(2), Niu R(4).

Author information: 
(1)Public Laboratory, Key Laboratory of Breast Cancer Prevention and Therapy,
Tianjin Medical University, Ministry of Education, Tianjin Medical University
Cancer Institute and Hospital, National Clinical Research Center for Cancer,
Tianjin 300060, China; Key Laboratory of Cancer Prevention and Therapy, Tianjin
300060, China. Electronic address: tjmuzhangfei@hotmail.com. (2)Public
Laboratory, Key Laboratory of Breast Cancer Prevention and Therapy, Tianjin
Medical University, Ministry of Education, Tianjin Medical University Cancer
Institute and Hospital, National Clinical Research Center for Cancer, Tianjin
300060, China; Key Laboratory of Cancer Prevention and Therapy, Tianjin 300060,
China. (3)Ontario Cancer Institute/Princess Margaret Hospital, University of
Toronto, 610 University Avenue, Toronto, ON M5G 2M9, Canada. (4)Public
Laboratory, Key Laboratory of Breast Cancer Prevention and Therapy, Tianjin
Medical University, Ministry of Education, Tianjin Medical University Cancer
Institute and Hospital, National Clinical Research Center for Cancer, Tianjin
300060, China; Key Laboratory of Cancer Prevention and Therapy, Tianjin 300060,
China. Electronic address: niuruifang@tjmuch.com.

Anxa2 is dysregulated in many types of carcinomas and implicated in several
pivotal biological functions, such as angiogenesis, cell proliferation, invasion,
and metastasis. We previously demonstrated that upregulation of Anxa2 enhances
the proliferation and invasion of breast cancer cells. However, the detailed
mechanism remains unclear. In this study, co-immunoprecipitation and
LC-MS/MS-based interactome approach were employed to screen potential Anxa2
binding proteins. A total of 312 proteins were identified as candidate Anxa2
interacting partners. Using Gene Ontology, pathway annotation, and
protein-protein interaction analyses, we constructed a connected network for
Anxa2 interacting proteins, and Ebp1 may function as a "hub" in the Anxa2
interaction network. Moreover, Ebp1 knockdown resulted in enhanced cell
proliferation and invasion, as well as increased expression of Anxa2.
Furthermore, the abundance of cyclin D1 and the phosphorylation of Erk1/2 were
increased in Ebp1 inhibited cells. This finding is consistent with a previous
study, in which upregulation of Anxa2 results in an increased cyclin D1
expression and Erk1/2 activation. Our results suggest a novel function of Ebp1 as
a binding protein and negative regulator of Anxa2. The functional association
between Anxa2 and EBP1 may also participate in regulating cancer cell
proliferation and invasion, thereby contributing to cancer progression.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mce.2015.04.013 
PMID: 25917452  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. BMC Cancer. 2015 Apr 7;15:227. doi: 10.1186/s12885-015-1259-0.

Role of the splicing factor SRSF4 in cisplatin-induced modifications of pre-mRNA 
splicing and apoptosis.

Gabriel M(1), Delforge Y(2), Deward A(3), Habraken Y(4), Hennuy B(5), Piette
J(6), Klinck R(7), Chabot B(8), Colige A(9), Lambert C(10).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Connective Tissues Biology, GIGA-Cancer, University of Liège,
avenue de l'Hôpital 1, 4000, Liège, Belgium. maude.gabriel@ulg.ac.be.
(2)Laboratory of Connective Tissues Biology, GIGA-Cancer, University of Liège,
avenue de l'Hôpital 1, 4000, Liège, Belgium. yves.delforge@ulg.ac.be.
(3)Laboratory of Virology and Immunology, GIGA-Signal Transduction, GIGA B34,
University of Liège, avenue de l'Hôpital 1, 4000, Liège, Belgium.
adeward@ulg.ac.be. (4)Laboratory of Virology and Immunology, GIGA-Signal
Transduction, GIGA B34, University of Liège, avenue de l'Hôpital 1, 4000, Liège, 
Belgium. Yvette.habraken@ulg.ac.be. (5)GIGA Genomics Platform, University of
Liège, avenue de l'Hôpital 1, 4000, Liège, Belgium. benoit.hennuy@ulg.ac.be.
(6)Laboratory of Virology and Immunology, GIGA-Signal Transduction, GIGA B34,
University of Liège, avenue de l'Hôpital 1, 4000, Liège, Belgium.
jpiette@ulg.ac.be. (7)Laboratory of Functional Genomics and Department of
Microbiology and Infectiology, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences,
Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Québec, Canada.
roscoe.klinck@usherbrooke.ca. (8)Laboratory of Functional Genomics and Department
of Microbiology and Infectiology, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences,
Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Québec, Canada.
benoit.chabot@usherbrooke.ca. (9)Laboratory of Connective Tissues Biology,
GIGA-Cancer, University of Liège, avenue de l'Hôpital 1, 4000, Liège, Belgium.
acolige@ulg.ac.be. (10)Laboratory of Connective Tissues Biology, GIGA-Cancer,
University of Liège, avenue de l'Hôpital 1, 4000, Liège, Belgium.
c.lambert@ulg.ac.be.

BACKGROUND: Modification of splicing by chemotherapeutic drugs has usually been
evaluated on a limited number of pre-mRNAs selected for their recognized or
potential importance in cell proliferation or apoptosis. However, the pathways
linking splicing alterations to the efficiency of cancer therapy remain unclear.
METHODS: Next-generation sequencing was used to analyse the transcriptome of
breast carcinoma cells treated by cisplatin. Pharmacological inhibitors, RNA
interference, cells deficient in specific signalling pathways, RT-PCR and FACS
analysis were used to investigate how the anti-cancer drug cisplatin affected
alternative splicing and the cell death pathway.
RESULTS: We identified 717 splicing events affected by cisplatin, including 245
events involving cassette exons. Gene ontology analysis indicates that cell
cycle, mRNA processing and pre-mRNA splicing were the main pathways affected.
Importantly, the cisplatin-induced splicing alterations required class I PI3Ks
P110β but not components such as ATM, ATR and p53 that are involved in the DNA
damage response. The siRNA-mediated depletion of the splicing regulator SRSF4,
but not SRSF6, expression abrogated many of the splicing alterations as well as
cell death induced by cisplatin.
CONCLUSION: Many of the splicing alterations induced by cisplatin are caused by
SRSF4 and they contribute to apoptosis in a process requires class I PI3K.

DOI: 10.1186/s12885-015-1259-0 
PMCID: PMC4399393
PMID: 25884497  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. PLoS One. 2015 Apr 13;10(4):e0122339. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0122339.
eCollection 2015.

The active tamoxifen metabolite endoxifen (4OHNDtam) strongly down-regulates
cytokeratin 6 (CK6) in MCF-7 breast cancer cells.

Helland T(1), Gjerde J(2), Dankel S(2), Fenne IS(2), Skartveit L(2), Drangevåg
A(2), Bozickovic O(2), Flågeng MH(2), Søiland H(3), Mellgren G(2), Lien EA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Hormone Laboratory, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway. (2)Hormone 
Laboratory, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway; Department of Clinical
Science, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway. (3)Department of Clinical Science,
University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway; Section for Breast and Endocrine Surgery,
Stavanger University Hospital, Stavanger, Norway.

INTRODUCTION: Tamoxifen is an anti-estrogen drug used in treatment of Estrogen
Receptor (ER) positive breast cancer. Effects and side effects of tamoxifen is
the sum of tamoxifen and all its metabolites. 4-Hydroxytamoxifen (4OHtam) and
4-hydroxy-N-demethyltamoxifen (4OHNDtam, endoxifen) both have ER affinity
exceeding that of the parent drug tamoxifen. 4OHNDtam is considered the main
active metabolite of tamoxifen. Ndesmethyltamoxifen (NDtam) is the major
tamoxifen metabolite. It has low affinity to the ER and is not believed to
influence tumor growth. However, NDtam might mediate adverse effects of tamoxifen
treatment. In this study we investigated the gene regulatory effects of the three
metabolites of tamoxifen in MCF-7 breast cancer cells.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Using concentrations that mimic the clinical situation we
examined effects of 4OHtam, 4OHNDtam and NDtam on global gene expression in
17β-estradiol (E2) treated MCF-7 cells. Transcriptomic responses were assessed by
correspondence analysis, differential expression, gene ontology analysis and
quantitative real time PCR (Q-rt-PCR). E2 deprivation and knockdown of Steroid
Receptor Coactivator-3 (SRC-3)/Amplified in Breast Cancer 1 (AIB1) mRNA in MCF-7 
cells were performed to further characterize specific effects on gene expression.
RESULTS: 4OHNDtam and 4OHtam caused major changes in gene expression compared to 
treatment with E2 alone, with a stronger effect of 4OHNDtam. NDtam had nearly no 
effect on the global gene expression profile. Treatment of MCF-7 cells with
4OHNDtam led to a strong down-regulation of the CytoKeratin 6 isoforms (KRT6A,
KRT6B and KRT6C). The CytoKeratin 6 mRNAs were also down-regulated in MCF-7 cells
after E2 deprivation and after SRC-3/AIB1 knockdown.
CONCLUSION: Using concentrations that mimic the clinical situation we report
global gene expression changes that were most pronounced with 4OHNDtam and
minimal with NDtam. Genes encoding CytoKeratin 6, were highly down-regulated by
4OHNDtam, as well as after E2 deprivation and knockdown of SRC-3/AIB1, indicating
an estrogen receptor-dependent regulation.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0122339 
PMCID: PMC4395096
PMID: 25867603  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Breast Cancer Res. 2015 Mar 4;17:31. doi: 10.1186/s13058-015-0539-6.

Mouse mammary stem cells express prognostic markers for triple-negative breast
cancer.

Soady KJ, Kendrick H, Gao Q, Tutt A, Zvelebil M, Ordonez LD, Quist J, Tan DW,
Isacke CM, Grigoriadis A, Smalley MJ.

INTRODUCTION: Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is a heterogeneous group of
tumours in which chemotherapy, the current mainstay of systemic treatment, is
often initially beneficial but with a high risk of relapse and metastasis. There 
is currently no means of predicting which TNBC will relapse. We tested the
hypothesis that the biological properties of normal stem cells are re-activated
in tumour metastasis and that, therefore, the activation of normal mammary stem
cell-associated gene sets in primary TNBC would be highly prognostic for relapse 
and metastasis.
METHODS: Mammary basal stem and myoepithelial cells were isolated by flow
cytometry and tested in low-dose transplant assays. Gene expression microarrays
were used to establish expression profiles of the stem and myoepithelial
populations; these were compared to each other and to our previously established 
mammary epithelial gene expression profiles. Stem cell genes were classified by
Gene Ontology (GO) analysis and the expression of a subset analysed in the stem
cell population at single cell resolution. Activation of stem cell genes was
interrogated across different breast cancer cohorts and within specific subtypes 
and tested for clinical prognostic power.
RESULTS: A set of 323 genes was identified that was expressed significantly more 
highly in the purified basal stem cells compared to all other cells of the
mammary epithelium. A total of 109 out of 323 genes had been associated with stem
cell features in at least one other study in addition to our own, providing
further support for their involvement in the biology of this cell type. GO
analysis demonstrated an enrichment of these genes for an association with cell
migration, cytoskeletal regulation and tissue morphogenesis, consistent with a
role in invasion and metastasis. Single cell resolution analysis showed that
individual cells co-expressed both epithelial- and mesenchymal-associated
genes/proteins. Most strikingly, we demonstrated that strong activity of this
stem cell gene set in TNBCs identified those tumours most likely to rapidly
progress to metastasis.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings support the hypothesis that the biological properties
of normal stem cells are drivers of metastasis and that these properties can be
used to stratify patients with a highly heterogeneous disease such as TNBC.

DOI: 10.1186/s13058-015-0539-6 
PMCID: PMC4381533
PMID: 25849541  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Clin Cancer Res. 2015 Aug 1;21(15):3402-11. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-14-1403.
Epub 2015 Apr 3.

Global Transcriptional Changes Following Statin Treatment in Breast Cancer.

Bjarnadottir O(1), Kimbung S(2), Johansson I(2), Veerla S(3), Jönsson M(2),
Bendahl PO(2), Grabau D(2), Hedenfalk I(2), Borgquist S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oncology and Pathology, Department of Clinical Sciences, Lund
University, Lund, Sweden. Department of Oncology, Skåne University Hospital,
Lund, Sweden. (2)Division of Oncology and Pathology, Department of Clinical
Sciences, Lund University, Lund, Sweden. (3)Division of Oncology and Pathology,
Department of Clinical Sciences, Lund University, Lund, Sweden. SciBlu genomics, 
Lund University, Sweden. (4)Division of Oncology and Pathology, Department of
Clinical Sciences, Lund University, Lund, Sweden. Department of Oncology, Skåne
University Hospital, Lund, Sweden. signe.borgquist@med.lu.se.

BACKGROUND: Statins purportedly exert antitumoral effects, but the underlying
mechanisms are currently not fully elucidated. The aim of this study was to
explore potential statin-induced effects on global gene expression profiles in
primary breast cancer.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: This window-of-opportunity phase II trial enrolled 50 newly 
diagnosed breast cancer patients prescribed atorvastatin (80 mg/day) for 2 weeks 
presurgically. Pre- and posttreatment tumor samples were analyzed using
Significance Analysis of Microarrays (SAM) to identify differentially expressed
genes. Similarly, SAM and gene ontology analyses were applied to gene expression 
data derived from atorvastatin-treated breast cancer cell lines (MCF7, BT474,
SKBR3, and MDAMB231) comparing treated and untreated cells. The Systematic Motif 
Analysis Retrieval Tool (SMART) was used to identify enriched transcription
factor-binding sites. Literature Vector Analysis (LitVAn) identified gene module 
functionality, and pathway analysis was performed using GeneGo Pathways Software 
(MetaCore; https://portal.genego.com/).
RESULTS: Comparative analysis of gene expression profiles in paired clinical
samples revealed 407 significantly differentially expressed genes (FDR = 0); 32
upregulated and 375 downregulated genes. Restricted filtration (fold change
≥1.49) resulted in 21 upregulated and 46 downregulated genes. Significantly
upregulated genes included DUSP1, RHOB1, GADD45B, and RGS1. Pooled results from
gene ontology, LitVAn and SMART analyses identified statin-induced effects on the
apoptotic and MAPK pathways among others. Comparative analyses of gene expression
profiles in breast cancer cell lines showed significant upregulation of the
mevalonate and proapoptotic pathways following atorvastatin treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: We report potential statin-induced changes in global tumor gene
expression profiles, indicating MAPK pathway inhibition and proapoptotic events.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-14-1403 
PMID: 25840970  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Int J Oncol. 2015 May;46(5):2047-56. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2015.2932. Epub 2015 Mar
17.

Identification of multi-target effects of Huaier aqueous extract via microarray
profiling in triple-negative breast cancer cells.

Kong X(1), Ding X(2), Yang Q(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Breast Surgery, Qilu Hospital, Shandong University, Jinan,
Shandong 250012, P.R. China. (2)Department of Oncology, Qilu Hospital, Shandong
University, Jinan, Shandong 250012, P.R. China.

Breast cancer is one of the most common malignant tumors in the world. Long-term 
maintenance treatment is important for breast cancer. However, effective
maintenance treatment is lacking for triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC).
Traditional Chinese medicine (TCM) has shown its potential anticancer roles as an
effective maintenance treatment for TNBC. However its mechanisms remained
unclear. In this study, we detected the differentially expressed genes (DEGs)
after treatment with Huaier aqueous extract by using microarray profiling in
MDA-MB-231 cells. Gene Ontology (GO) analysis, Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and
Genomes (KEGG) pathway analysis and gene-gene interaction network were conducted 
to confirm the altered biological functions induced by Huaier extract. Screening 
of DEGs gave 387 genes (226 upregulated and 161 downregulated) in MDA-MB-231
cells which were regulated significantly by Huaier extract. GO and KEGG pathway
analysis suggested that a number of functions were affected by Huaier, including 
proliferation, apoptosis, migration, and angiogenesis. Gene-gene interaction
network showed the detailed molecular signal-net. Based on microarray data, we
studied several functions of Huaier extract and in return verified the results of
microarray profiling. This study had important guidance roles and indicated new
research directions.

DOI: 10.3892/ijo.2015.2932 
PMID: 25826742  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Mol Med Rep. 2015 Aug;12(2):1789-95. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2015.3565. Epub 2015 Mar
27.

Identification of therapeutic targets for breast cancer using biological
informatics methods.

Liu X(1), Ma Y(2), Yang W(1), Wu X(1), Jiang L(1), Chen X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, The People's Hospital of Linyi Economic and
Technological Development Zone, Linyi, Shandong 276023, P.R. China. (2)Department
of Histological Embryology, Shandong Medical College, Linyi, Shandong 276000,
P.R. China.

The present study aimed to investigate the modular mechanisms underlying breast
cancer and identify potential targets for breast cancer treatment. The
differentially expressed genes (DEGs) between breast cancer and normal cells were
assessed using microarray data obtained from the Gene Expression Omnibus
database. Gene ontology (GO) and pathway enrichment analyses were performed in
order to investigate the functions of these DEGs. Subsequently, the
protein-protein interaction (PPI) network was constructed using the Cytoscape
software. The identified subnetworks were further analyzed using the Molecular
Complex Detection plugin. In total, 571 genes (241 upregulated and 330
downregulated genes) were found to be differentially expressed between breast
cancer and normal cells. The GO terms significantly enriched by DEGs included
cell adhesion, immune response and extracellular region, while the most
significant pathways included focal adhesion and complement and coagulation
cascade pathways. The PPI network was established with 273 nodes and 718 edges,
while fibronectin 1 (FN1, degrees score, 39), interleukin 6 (IL6; degree score,
96) and c-Fos protein (degree score, 32) were identified as the hub proteins in
subnetwork 2. These dysregulated genes were found to be involved in the
development of breast cancer. The FN1, IL6 and FOS genes may therefore be
potential targets in the treatment of breast cancer.

DOI: 10.3892/mmr.2015.3565 
PMCID: PMC4464090
PMID: 25824986  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Mol Cancer Ther. 2015 May;14(5):1213-23. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-14-1092. Epub
2015 Mar 16.

Synthetic Lethal Screens Identify Vulnerabilities in GPCR Signaling and
Cytoskeletal Organization in E-Cadherin-Deficient Cells.

Telford BJ(1), Chen A(1), Beetham H(1), Frick J(1), Brew TP(1), Gould CM(2),
Single A(1), Godwin T(1), Simpson KJ(3), Guilford P(4).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Genetics Laboratory, Department of Biochemistry, University of Otago,
Dunedin, New Zealand. (2)Victorian Centre for Functional Genomics, Peter
MacCallum Cancer Centre, East Melbourne, Victoria, Australia. (3)Victorian Centre
for Functional Genomics, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, East Melbourne, Victoria,
Australia. The Sir Peter MacCallum Department of Oncology, The University of
Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, Australia. (4)Cancer Genetics Laboratory,
Department of Biochemistry, University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand.
parry.guilford@otago.ac.nz.

The CDH1 gene, which encodes the cell-to-cell adhesion protein E-cadherin, is
frequently mutated in lobular breast cancer (LBC) and diffuse gastric cancer
(DGC). However, because E-cadherin is a tumor suppressor protein and lost from
the cancer cell, it is not a conventional drug target. To overcome this, we have 
taken a synthetic lethal approach to determine whether the loss of E-cadherin
creates druggable vulnerabilities. We first conducted a genome-wide siRNA screen 
of isogenic MCF10A cells with and without CDH1 expression. Gene ontology analysis
demonstrated that G-protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) signaling proteins were
highly enriched among the synthetic lethal candidates. Diverse families of
cytoskeletal proteins were also frequently represented. These broad classes of
E-cadherin synthetic lethal hits were validated using both lentiviral-mediated
shRNA knockdown and specific antagonists, including the JAK inhibitor LY2784544, 
Pertussis toxin, and the aurora kinase inhibitors alisertib and danusertib. Next,
we conducted a 4,057 known drug screen and time course studies on the CDH1
isogenic MCF10A cell lines and identified additional drug classes with linkages
to GPCR signaling and cytoskeletal function that showed evidence of E-cadherin
synthetic lethality. These included multiple histone deacetylase inhibitors,
including vorinostat and entinostat, PI3K inhibitors, and the tyrosine kinase
inhibitors crizotinib and saracatinib. Together, these results demonstrate that
E-cadherin loss creates druggable vulnerabilities that have the potential to
improve the management of both sporadic and familial LBC and DGC.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-14-1092 
PMID: 25777964  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. J Cell Mol Med. 2015 May;19(5):1094-102. doi: 10.1111/jcmm.12504. Epub 2015 Mar
6.

Convergence and divergence of genetic and modular networks between diabetes and
breast cancer.

Zhang X(1), Zhang Y, Yu Y, Liu J, Yuan Y, Zhao Y, Li H, Wang J, Wang Z.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Basic Research in Clinical Medicine, China Academy of Chinese
Medical Sciences, Beijing, China.

Diabetes mellitus (DM) and breast cancer (BC) can simultaneously occur in the
same patient populations, but the molecular relationship between them remains
unknown. In this study, we constructed genetic networks and used modularized
analysis approaches to investigate the multi-dimensional characteristics of two
diseases and one disease subtype. A text search engine (Agilent Literature Search
2.71) and MCODE software were applied to validate potential subnetworks and to
divide the modules, respectively. A total of 793 DM-related genes, 386 type 2
diabetes (T2DM) genes and 873 BC-related genes were identified from the Online
Mendelian Inheritance in Man database. For DM and BC, a total of 99 overlapping
genes, 9 modules, 29 biological processes and 7 pathways were identified.
Meanwhile, for T2DM and BC, 56 overlapping genes, 5 modules, 20 biological
processes and 12 pathways were identified. Based on the Gene Ontology functional 
enrichment analysis of the top 10 non-overlapping modules of the two diseases, 10
biological functions and 5 pathways overlapped between them. The
glycosphingolipid and lysosome pathways verified molecular mechanisms of cell
death related to both DM and BC. We also identified new biological functions of
dopamine receptors and four signalling pathways (Parkinson's disease, Alzheimer's
disease, Huntington's disease and long-term depression) related to both diseases;
these warrant further investigation. Our results illustrate the landscape of the 
novel molecular substructures between DM and BC, which may support a new model
for complex disease classification and rational therapies for multiple diseases.

© 2015 The Authors. Journal of Cellular and Molecular Medicine published by John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd and Foundation for Cellular and Molecular Medicine.

DOI: 10.1111/jcmm.12504 
PMCID: PMC4420611
PMID: 25752479  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Environ Toxicol Chem. 2015 Jun;34(6):1362-8. doi: 10.1002/etc.2930. Epub 2015 Apr
13.

Transcriptional profiling of the soil invertebrate Folsomia candida in
pentachlorophenol-contaminated soil.

Qiao M(1), Wang GP(1), Zhang C(1,)(2), Roelofs D(3), van Straalen NM(3), Zhu
YG(4).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Lab of Urban and Regional Ecology, Research Center for
Eco-Environmental Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(2)College of Resources and Environment, Shandong Agricultural University,
Tai'an, China. (3)Department of Animal Ecology, VU University, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands. (4)Key Laboratory of Urban Environment and Health, Institute of
Urban Environment, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Xiamen, China.

Pentachlorophenol (PCP), a widely used pesticide, is considered to be an
endocrine disruptor. The molecular effects of chemicals with endocrine-disrupting
potential on soil invertebrates are largely unknown. In the present study, the
authors explored the transcriptional expression changes of collembola (Folsomia
candida) in response to PCP contamination. A total of 92 genes were significantly
differentially expressed at all exposure times, and the majority of them were
found to be downregulated. In addition to the transcripts encoding cytochrome
P450s and transferase enzymes, chitin-binding protein was also identified in the 
list of common differentially expressed genes. Analyses of gene ontology
annotation and enrichment revealed that cell cycle-related transcripts were
significantly induced by PCP, indicating that PCP can stimulate cell
proliferation in springtail, as has been reported in human breast cancer cells.
Enrichment of functional terms related to steroid receptors was observed,
particularly in 20 significant differentially expressed genes involved in chitin 
metabolism in response to PCP exposure. Combined with confirmation by
quantitative polymerase chain reaction, the results indicate that the adverse
effects on reproduction of springtails after exposure to PCP can be attributed to
a chemical-induced delay in the molting cycle and that molting-associated genes
may serve as possible biomarkers for assessing toxicological effects.

© 2015 SETAC.

DOI: 10.1002/etc.2930 
PMID: 25703271  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Oncol Rep. 2015 Apr;33(4):1985-93. doi: 10.3892/or.2015.3810. Epub 2015 Feb 17.

Cross-platform meta-analysis of multiple gene expression profiles identifies
novel expression signatures in acquired anthracycline-resistant breast cancer.

Lee YS(1), Ryu SW(1), Bae SJ(1), Park TH(2), Kwon K(3), Noh YH(1), Kim SY(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Konkuk University School of Medicine,
Seoul 143‑701, Republic of Korea. (2)Institute for Human Tissue Restoration,
Department of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, College of Medicine, Yonsei
University, Seoul 120-749, Republic of Korea. (3)Pusan National University School
of Korean Medicine, Pusan 609-735, Republic of Korea.

Anthracyclines are among the most effective and commonly used chemotherapeutic
agents. However, the development of acquired anthracycline resistance is a major 
limitation to their clinical application. The aim of the present study was to
identify differentially expressed genes (DEGs) and biological processes
associated with the acquisition of anthracycline resistance in human breast
cancer cells. We performed a meta-analysis of publically available microarray
datasets containing data on stepwise-selected, anthracycline‑resistant breast
cancer cell lines using the RankProd package in R. Additionally, the gene
ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) databases were
used to analyze GO term enrichment and pathways, respectively. A protein-protein 
interaction (PPI) network was also generated using Cytoscape software. The
meta-analysis yielded 413 DEGs related to anthracycline resistance in human
breast cancer cells, and 374 of these were not involved in individual DEGs. GO
analyses showed the 413 genes were enriched with terms such as 'response to
steroid metabolic process', 'chemical stimulus', 'external stimulus', 'hormone
stimulus', 'multicellular organismal process', and 'system development'. Pathway 
analysis revealed significant pathways including steroid hormone biosynthesis,
cytokine-cytokine receptor interaction, drug metabolism-cytochrome P450,
metabolism of xenobiotics by cytochrome P450, and arachidonic acid metabolism.
The PPI network indicated that proteins encoded by TRIM29, VTN, CCNA1, and
karyopherin α 5 (KPNA5) participated in a significant number of interactions. In 
conclusion, our meta-analysis provides a comprehensive view of gene expression
patterns associated with acquired resistance to anthracycline in breast cancer
cells, and constitutes the basis for additional functional studies.

DOI: 10.3892/or.2015.3810 
PMID: 25695524  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Sci Rep. 2015 Feb 12;5:8336. doi: 10.1038/srep08336.

A statistically inferred microRNA network identifies breast cancer target miR-940
as an actin cytoskeleton regulator.

Bhajun R(1), Guyon L(1), Pitaval A(1), Sulpice E(1), Combe S(1), Obeid P(1),
Haguet V(1), Ghorbel I(1), Lajaunie C(2), Gidrol X(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Univ. Grenoble Alpes, iRTSV-BGE, F-38000 Grenoble, France [2] CEA,
iRTSV-BGE, F-38000 Grenoble, France [3] INSERM, BGE, F-38000 Grenoble, France.
(2)1] Center for Computational Biology - CBIO, Mines ParisTech, F-77300
Fontainebleau, France [2] Institut Curie, F-75248 Paris, France [3] INSERM, U900,
F-75248 Paris, France.

MiRNAs are key regulators of gene expression. By binding to many genes, they
create a complex network of gene co-regulation. Here, using a network-based
approach, we identified miRNA hub groups by their close connections and common
targets. In one cluster containing three miRNAs, miR-612, miR-661 and miR-940,
the annotated functions of the co-regulated genes suggested a role in small
GTPase signalling. Although the three members of this cluster targeted the same
subset of predicted genes, we showed that their overexpression impacted cell
fates differently. miR-661 demonstrated enhanced phosphorylation of myosin II and
an increase in cell invasion, indicating a possible oncogenic miRNA. On the
contrary, miR-612 and miR-940 inhibit phosphorylation of myosin II and cell
invasion. Finally, expression profiling in human breast tissues showed that
miR-940 was consistently downregulated in breast cancer tissues.

DOI: 10.1038/srep08336 
PMID: 25673565  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2015 Feb;149(3):693-703. doi: 10.1007/s10549-015-3281-y.
Epub 2015 Feb 8.

DC-SCRIPT is a novel regulator of the tumor suppressor gene CDKN2B and induces
cell cycle arrest in ERα-positive breast cancer cells.

Ansems M(1), Søndergaard JN, Sieuwerts AM, Looman MW, Smid M, de Graaf AM, de
Weerd V, Zuidscherwoude M, Foekens JA, Martens JW, Adema GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tumor Immunology, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences,
Radboud University Medical Center, 6500 HB, Nijmegen, The Netherlands,
Marleen.Ansems@radboudumc.nl.

Breast cancer is one of the most common causes of cancer-related deaths in women.
The estrogen receptor (ERα) is well known for having growth promoting effects in 
breast cancer. Recently, we have identified DC-SCRIPT (ZNF366) as a co-suppressor
of ERα and as a strong and independent prognostic marker in ESR1 (ERα
gene)-positive breast cancer patients. In this study, we further investigated the
molecular mechanism on how DC-SCRIPT inhibits breast cancer cell growth.
DC-SCRIPT mRNA levels from 190 primary ESR1-positive breast tumors were related
to global gene expression, followed by gene ontology and pathway analysis. The
effect of DC-SCRIPT on breast cancer cell growth and cell cycle arrest was
investigated using novel DC-SCRIPT-inducible MCF7 breast cancer cell lines.
Genome-wide expression profiling of DC-SCRIPT-expressing MCF7 cells was performed
to investigate the effect of DC-SCRIPT on cell cycle-related gene expression.
Findings were validated by real-time PCR in a cohort of 1,132 ESR1-positive
breast cancer patients. In the primary ESR1-positive breast tumors, DC-SCRIPT
expression negatively correlated with several cell cycle gene ontologies and
pathways. DC-SCRIPT expression strongly reduced breast cancer cell growth in
vitro, breast tumor growth in vivo, and induced cell cycle arrest. In addition,
in the presence of DC-SCRIPT, multiple cell cycles related genes were
differentially expressed including the tumor suppressor gene CDKN2B. Moreover, in
1,132 primary ESR1-positive breast tumors, DC-SCRIPT expression also correlated
with CDKN2B expression. Collectively, these data show that DC-SCRIPT acts as a
novel regulator of CDKN2B and induces cell cycle arrest in ESR1-positive breast
cancer cells.

DOI: 10.1007/s10549-015-3281-y 
PMCID: PMC4326655
PMID: 25663546  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Biomed Pharmacother. 2015 Feb;69:221-7. doi: 10.1016/j.biopha.2014.12.002. Epub
2014 Dec 12.

Microarray expression profile analysis of long non-coding RNAs in human breast
cancer: a study of Chinese women.

Xu N(1), Wang F(2), Lv M(2), Cheng L(3).

Author information: 
(1)First Clinical Medicine College, Nanjing University of Chinese Medicine,
Nanjing, China. (2)Nanjing Maternity and Child Health Care Hospital Affiliated to
Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China. (3)Nanjing Maternity and Child Health
Care Hospital Affiliated to Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China.
Electronic address: lucheng_njmu@163.com.

Breast cancer (BC) is the most commonly diagnosed cancer and the second leading
cause of cancer death among women. Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) are key
regulators of gene expression. Numerous lncRNAs have performed critical roles in 
cancer biology including breast cancer (BC). The expression levels of certain
lncRNAs are associated with tumor development, recurrence, metastasis, and
prognosis. However, the potential roles that lncRNAs regulate breast cancer
tumorigenesis and tumor progression are still poorly understood. To investigate
the potential roles of lncRNAs in the breast cancer, we constructed BC related
lncRNA libraries by using microarray. Microarray expression profiling suggests
790 up-regulated and 637 down-regulated (log fold-change>2.3) lncRNAs were
differently expressed between BC tissues and its paired adjacent tissues.
Furthermore, we found differently expressed lncRNAs associated with immune
regulation. RP4-583P15.10, an up-regulated lncRNA, was found to be located
downstream of the natural antisense of the ZBTB46 gene, which may regulated
breast cancer through influence immune system. In conclusion, our results for the
first time indicate that distinct lncRNAs expression profiles of BC, which
related to the immune network, may provide information for further research on
immune regulation during the BC process.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biopha.2014.12.002 
PMID: 25661361  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Biomed Pharmacother. 2015 Feb;69:162-9. doi: 10.1016/j.biopha.2014.11.028. Epub
2014 Nov 25.

Systematic analysis of gene expression pattern in has-miR-760 overexpressed
resistance of the MCF-7 human breast cancer cell to doxorubicin.

Lv J(1), Fu Z(2), Shi M(1), Xia K(3), Ji C(2), Xu P(2), Lv M(2), Pan B(1), Dai
L(1), Xie H(4).

Author information: 
(1)Yangzhou Maternal and Child Health Hospital, Affiliated with Yangzhou Medical 
University, Yangzhou 225002, China. (2)Nanjing Maternal and Child Health Medical 
Institute, Affiliated Nanjing Maternal and Child Health Hospital, Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing 210004, China. (3)The Affiliated Jiangyin Hospital of
Southeast University Medical College, Jiangyin 214400, China. (4)Nanjing Maternal
and Child Health Medical Institute, Affiliated Nanjing Maternal and Child Health 
Hospital, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 210004, China; The People's
Hospital of Jiangsu Province/The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing 210029, China. Electronic address: xhfybj@163.com.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Chemoresistance of breast cancer is a growing problem and still 
a major clinical obstacle to successful treatment in clinical patients. miR-760
was significantly downregulated in chemoresistance breast cancer tissues compared
to chemo-sensitive tissues in our previous study. However, the role of miR-760 in
modulating drug resistance remains largely unexplored. In this study, we sought
to determine the expression pattern of miR-760 targeted mRNAs, and explore their 
potential functions and participated-pathways in breast cancer drug resistance
cells.
RESULTS: Compared to parental cell line MCF-7, miR-760 was downregulated by 6.15 
folds in MCF-7/Adr cells. The qRT-PCR result showed that compared to miR-760
negative control cells group, miR-760 was up-regulated 15.817 folds after miR-760
lentiviral transfection in miR-760 mimics group. The microarray data showed that 
270 genes were dysregulated over 2-fold change in MCF-7/Adr cells after miR-760
overexpressed, including 241 up-regulated and 29 downregulated genes. GO analysis
result appeared that the predicted target genes of miR-760 mainly regulated DNA
binding, protein binding, molecular function, nucleic acid binding, and so on;
the pathway analysis data demonstrated that these target genes mainly involved in
cell cycle, TGF-beta signaling pathway, mRNA processing reactome, G protein
signaling, apoptosis, Wnt signaling pathway, and other signaling pathways. There 
were 3 predicted target genes (RHOB, ANGOTL4, ABCA1) of miR-760 were selected at 
a P value<0.05 and the fold enrichment was>40.
CONCLUSION: Our study explored the genes expression pattern after miR-760
overexpresssed, and confirmed 3 dominantly dysregulated genes, which could expand
the insights into the miR-760 function and molecular mechanisms in drug
resistance of breast cancer. This study might afford a comprehensive
understanding of miR-760 as prognostic biomarkers during clinical treatment, and 
we supposed that the miR-760 expression levels in drug resistance carcinoma
tissues could be pursued to develop new strategies for targeted therapies in
chemoresistant breast cancer patients.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biopha.2014.11.028 
PMID: 25661353  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2015 Apr;14(4):917-32. doi: 10.1074/mcp.M114.045914. Epub
2015 Jan 31.

In-depth proteomic analysis of six types of exudative pleural effusions for
nonsmall cell lung cancer biomarker discovery.

Liu PJ(1), Chen CD(2), Wang CL(3), Wu YC(4), Hsu CW(2), Lee CW(1), Huang LH(1),
Yu JS(5), Chang YS(2), Wu CC(6), Yu CJ(7).

Author information: 
(1)From the ‡Graduate Institute of Biomedical Sciences. (2)From the ‡Graduate
Institute of Biomedical Sciences, **Molecular Medicine Research Center, Chang
Gung University, Tao-Yuan, Taiwan; (3)§School of Medicine, ‡‡Division of
Pulmonary Oncology and Interventional Bronchoscopy, Department of Thoracic
Medicine. (4)§§Department of Thoracic Surgery, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital,
Linkou, Tao-Yuan, Taiwan. (5)From the ‡Graduate Institute of Biomedical Sciences,
¶Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, and **Molecular Medicine Research
Center, Chang Gung University, Tao-Yuan, Taiwan; (6)**Molecular Medicine Research
Center, Chang Gung University, Tao-Yuan, Taiwan; yucj1124@mail.cgu.edu.tw
luckywu@mail.cgu.edu.tw. (7)From the ‡Graduate Institute of Biomedical Sciences, 
¶Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, and yucj1124@mail.cgu.edu.tw
luckywu@mail.cgu.edu.tw.

Pleural effusion (PE), a tumor-proximal body fluid, may be a promising source for
biomarker discovery in human cancers. Because a variety of pathological
conditions can lead to PE, characterization of the relative PE proteomic profiles
from different types of PEs would accelerate discovery of potential PE biomarkers
specifically used to diagnose pulmonary disorders. Using quantitative proteomic
approaches, we identified 772 nonredundant proteins from six types of exudative
PEs, including three malignant PEs (MPE, from lung, breast, and gastric cancers),
one lung cancer paramalignant PE, and two benign diseases (tuberculosis and
pneumonia). Spectral counting was utilized to semiquantify PE protein levels.
Principal component analysis, hierarchical clustering, and Gene Ontology of
cellular process analyses revealed differential levels and functional profiling
of proteins in each type of PE. We identified 30 candidate proteins with twofold 
higher levels (q<0.05) in lung cancer MPEs than in the two benign PEs. Three
potential markers, MET, DPP4, and PTPRF, were further verified by ELISA using 345
PE samples. The protein levels of these potential biomarkers were significantly
higher in lung cancer MPE than in benign diseases or lung cancer paramalignant
PE. The area under the receiver-operator characteristic curve for three combined 
biomarkers in discriminating lung cancer MPE from benign diseases was 0.903. We
also observed that the PE protein levels were more clearly discriminated in
effusions in which the cytological examination was positive and that they would
be useful in rescuing the false negative of cytological examination in diagnosis 
of nonsmall cell lung cancer-MPE. Western blotting analysis further demonstrated 
that MET overexpression in lung cancer cells would contribute to the elevation of
soluble MET in MPE. Our results collectively demonstrate the utility of
label-free quantitative proteomic approaches in establishing differential PE
proteomes and provide a new database of proteins that can be used to facilitate
identification of pulmonary disorder-related biomarkers.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/mcp.M114.045914 
PMCID: PMC4390270
PMID: 25638566  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Int J Mol Med. 2015 Apr;35(4):973-8. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2015.2081. Epub 2015 Jan
27.

Chromatin immunoprecipitation-sequencing predicts p300 binding sites in the MCF7 
human breast cancer cell line.

Wang X(1), Li S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Medicine and Tumor Research, Chongqing Medical
University, Chongqing 400016, P.R. China.

The aim of the present study was to identify the distribution characters of p300 
binding sites in estradiol (E2) stimulated MCF7 cell lines and controls, and to
study the roles of transcriptional coactivator p300 in the tumorigenesis and
progression of various human cancers following E2 stimulation. The chromatin
immunoprecipitation followed by sequencing data of GSES9623 was downloaded from
the Gene Expression Omnibus database, including breast cancer data of GSM986085
and control data of GSM986087. MACS peak‑calling software was employed to
identify the p300‑bound sites in the two groups. The differential target genes of
p300‑bound sites were further analyzed and the concordant factors were predicted.
The Gene Ontology (GO) was used to conduct functional enrichment analysis. There 
were 32,249 p300 binding sites identified in the E2 stimulation group and 43,156 
in the control group. GO enrichment analysis of the target genes showed that
p300‑regulated target genes mainly participated in the neural cell
differentiation‑associated biology process; while in the E2 stimulation group,
partial functions of the target genes had changed. A total of 24,899 differential
p300‑bound sites of the two groups were identified and GO enrichment analysis
demonstrated that E2 stimulation changed p300 binding sites, but did not
influence the regulatory function of p300. The effect of E2 in the MCF7 cells
suggested that E2 affected the binding affinity of DNA and transcription factors 
in a large scale. By analyzing the concordant factors, several important factors 
were discovered, such as BRCA1 and ESR1. Overall, the results of the present
study suggested an association between p300 and carcinogenic genes. This may
provide theoretical guidance for cancer therapy.

DOI: 10.3892/ijmm.2015.2081 
PMID: 25625638  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2014;15(24):10847-53.

Identifying differentially expressed genes and screening small molecule drugs for
lapatinib-resistance of breast cancer by a bioinformatics strategy.

Zhuo WL(1), Zhang L, Xie QC, Zhu B, Chen ZT.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cancer, Xinqiao Hospital , Third Military Medical University,
Chongqing, China E-mail : zhuowenlei@tmmu.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Lapatinib, a dual tyrosine kinase inhibitor that interrupts the
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and HER2/neu pathways, has been indicated
to have significant efficacy in treating HER2-positive breast cancer. However,
acquired drug resistance has become a very serious clinical problem that hampers 
the use of this agent. In this study, we aimed to screen small molecule drugs
that might reverse lapatinib-resistance of breast cancer by exploring
differentially expressed genes (DEGs) via a bioinformatics method.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We downloaded the gene expression profile of BT474-J4
(acquired lapatinib-resistant) and BT474 (lapatinib-sensitive) cell lines from
the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database and selected differentially expressed 
genes (DEGs) using dChip software. Then, gene ontology and pathway enrichment
analyses were performed with the DAVID database. Finally, a connectivity map was 
utilized for predicting potential chemicals that reverse lapatinib-resistance.
RESULTS: A total of 1, 657 DEGs were obtained. These DEGs were enriched in 10
pathways, including cell cycling, regulation of actin cytoskeleton and focal
adhesion associate examples. In addition, several small molecules were screened
as the potential therapeutic agents capable of overcoming lapatinib-resistance.
CONCLUSIONS: The results of our analysis provided a novel strategy for
investigating the mechanism of lapatinib-resistance and identifying potential
small molecule drugs for breast cancer treatment.


PMID: 25605188  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Sci Rep. 2015 Jan 19;5:7830. doi: 10.1038/srep07830.

Systems pharmacology of mifepristone (RU486) reveals its 47 hub targets and
network: comprehensive analysis and pharmacological focus on FAK-Src-Paxillin
complex.

Yu S(1), Yang X(1), Zhu Y(1), Xie F(2), Lu Y(1), Yu T(1), Yan C(1), Shao J(1),
Gao Y(1), Mo F(1), Cai G(1), Sinko PJ(3), Jia L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Metastasis Alert and Prevention Center, College of Chemistry, Fuzhou
University, Fuzhou 350002, China. (2)Department of Oncology, Fuzhou General
Hospital, Fuzhou 350025, China. (3)Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey,
New Jersey 08854, USA.

Mifepristone (RU486), a synthetic steroid compound used as an abortifacient drug,
has received considerable attention to its anticancer activity recently. To
explore the possibility of using mifepristone as a cancer metastasis
chemopreventive, we performed a systems pharmacology analysis of
mifepristone-related molecules in the present study. Data were collected by using
Natural Language Processing (NLP) and 513 mifepristone-related genes were dug out
and classified functionally using a gene ontology (GO) hierarchy, followed by
KEGG pathway enrichment analysis. Potential signal pathways and targets involved 
in cancer were obtained by integrative network analysis. Total thirty-three
proteins were involved in focal adhesion-the key signaling pathway associated
with cancer metastasis. Molecular and cellular assays further demonstrated that
mifepristone had the ability to prevent breast cancer cells from migration and
interfere with their adhesion to endothelial cells. Moreover, mifepristone
inhibited the expression of focal adhesion kinase (FAK), paxillin, and the
formation of FAK/Src/Paxillin complex, which are correlated with cell adhesion
and migration. This study set a good example to identify chemotherapeutic
potential seamlessly from systems pharmacology to cellular pharmacology, and the 
revealed hub genes may be the promising targets for cancer metastasis
chemoprevention.

DOI: 10.1038/srep07830 
PMCID: PMC4297966
PMID: 25597938  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Comput Biol Med. 2015 Jun;61:163-71. doi: 10.1016/j.compbiomed.2014.12.019. Epub 
2015 Jan 7.

Integration of a prognostic gene module with a drug sensitivity module to
identify drugs that could be repurposed for breast cancer therapy.

Zhu L(1), Liu J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Key State Laboratory of Software Engineering, School of Computer, Wuhan
University, Wuhan 430072, PR China. (2)Key State Laboratory of Software
Engineering, School of Computer, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, PR China.
Electronic address: liujuan@whu.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Efficiently discovering low risk drugs is important for drug
development. However, the heterogeneity in patient population complicates the
prediction of the therapeutic efficiency. Drug repositioning aiming to discover
new indications of known drugs provides a possible gateway.
METHOD: We introduce a novel computational method to identify suitable drugs by
using prognosis information of patients. First, we identify prognostic related
gene modules, Prognostic Gene Ontology Module (PGOMs), by incorporating multiple 
functional annotations. Then, we build the drug sensitivity modules based on gene
expressions and drug activity patterns. Finally, we analyze the potential effects
of drugs on prognostic gene modules and establish the links between PGOMs and
drugs.
RESULT AND DISCUSSION: With PGOMs generated based on the patient outcome, FDA
approved drugs for breast cancer treatment have been successfully identified on
one hand; several drugs that have not been approved by FDA, such as Etoposide,
have found to strongly associate with the outcome on the other hand. With PGOMs
generated based on the patient ER status, Tamoxifen and Exemestane rank at the
top of the drug list, suggesting that they may be more specific to ER status of
breast cancer. Especially, the rank difference of Exemestane in ER+ group and ER-
group is very large, demonstrating that Exemestane may be more specific to ER+
breast cancer and would cause side-effect to ER- breast cancer patients. Our
method can not only identify the drugs that could be repurposed for breast cancer
therapy, but also can reveal their effective pharmacological mechanisms.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.compbiomed.2014.12.019 
PMID: 25596797  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Cell Cycle. 2015;14(4):630-40. doi: 10.4161/15384101.2014.994904.

eIF2 kinases mediate β-lapachone toxicity in yeast and human cancer cells.

Menacho-Márquez M(1), Rodríguez-Hernández CJ, Villaronga MÁ, Pérez-Valle J, Gadea
J, Belandia B, Murguía JR.

Author information: 
(1)a Instituto de Genética Experimental ; Facultad de Ciencias Médicas ;
Universidad Nacional de Rosario ; Rosario , Argentina.

β-Lapachone (β-lap) is a novel anticancer agent that selectively induces cell
death in human cancer cells, by activation of the NQO1 NAD(P)H dehydrogenase and 
radical oxygen species (ROS) generation. We characterized the gene expression
profile of budding yeast cells treated with β-lap using cDNA microarrays. Genes
involved in tolerance to oxidative stress were differentially expressed in β-lap 
treated cells. β-lap treatment generated reactive oxygen species (ROS), which
were efficiently blocked by dicoumarol, an inhibitor of NADH dehydrogenases. A
yeast mutant in the mitochondrial NADH dehydrogenase Nde2p was found to be
resistant to β-lap treatment, despite inducing ROS production in a WT manner.
Most interestingly, DNA damage responses triggered by β-lap were abolished in the
nde2Δ mutant. Amino acid biosynthesis genes were also induced in β-lap treated
cells, suggesting that β-lap exposure somehow triggered the General Control of
Nutrients (GCN) pathway. Accordingly, β-lap treatment increased phosphorylation
of eIF2α subunit in a manner dependent on the Gcn2p kinase. eIF2α phosphorylation
required Gcn1p, Gcn20p and Nde2p. Gcn2p was also required for cell survival upon 
exposure to β-lap and to elicit checkpoint responses. Remarkably, β-lap treatment
increased phosphorylation of eIF2α in breast tumor cells, in a manner dependent
on the Nde2p ortholog AIF, and the eIF2 kinase PERK. These findings uncover a new
target pathway of β-lap in yeast and human cells and highlight a previously
unknown functional connection between Nde2p, Gcn2p and DNA damage responses.

DOI: 10.4161/15384101.2014.994904 
PMCID: PMC5154358
PMID: 25590579  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. J Cancer Res Ther. 2014 Oct-Dec;10(4):1013-8. doi: 10.4103/0973-1482.137971.

Bioinformatics analysis of aggressive behavior of breast cancer via an integrated
gene regulatory network.

Yang X, Jia M, Li Z, Lu S, Qi X, Zhao B, Wang X, Rong Y, Shi J, Zhang Z, Xu W,
Gao Y, Zhang S, Yu G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, People's Hospital of Linzi District, Affiliated to
Binzhou Medical College, Zibo, China.

BACKGROUND: Breast cancer is one of the most frequently diagnosed cancers in
women. Though death from this disease is mainly caused by the metastases of the
aggressive cancer cells, few studies have expounded the aggressive behavior of
breast cancer.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We downloaded the gene expression profiles of GSE40057,
including four aggressive and six less-aggressive breast cancer cell lines, from 
Gene Expression Omnibus and identified the differentially expressed genes (DEGs) 
between the aggressive and less-aggressive samples. An integrated gene regulatory
network was built including DEGs, microRNAs (miRNAs), and transcription factors. 
Then, motifs and modules of the network were identified. Modules were further
analyzed at a functional level using Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of
Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway to study the aggressive behavior of breast
cancer.
RESULTS: A total of 764 DEGs were found and two modules were filtered from the
integrated gene regulatory network. Totally two motifs and modules for DEGs were 
identified. Significant GO terms associated with cell proliferation and hormone
stimulus of the modules were found and the target genes identified were  CAV1,
CD44, and TGFβR2. The KEGG pathway analysis discovered that CAV1 and FN1 were
significantly enriched in focal adhesion, extracellular matrix (ECM)-receptor
interaction, and pathways in cancer.
CONCLUSION: Aggressive behavior of breast cancer was proved to be related to cell
proliferation and hormone stimulus. Genes such as CAV1, CD44, TGFβR2, and FN1
might be potential targets to diagnose the aggressive behavior of breast cancer
cells.

DOI: 10.4103/0973-1482.137971 
PMID: 25579546  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Bioinformatics. 2015 May 15;31(10):1683-5. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btu853.
Epub 2015 Jan 9.

ENViz: a Cytoscape App for integrated statistical analysis and visualization of
sample-matched data with multiple data types.

Steinfeld I(1), Navon R(2), Creech ML(2), Yakhini Z(1), Tsalenko A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Agilent Laboratories, Tel-Aviv, Israel, Technion - Israel Institute of
Technology, Haifa, Israel, Blue Oak Software and Agilent Laboratories, Santa
Clara, CA, USA Agilent Laboratories, Tel-Aviv, Israel, Technion - Israel
Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel, Blue Oak Software and Agilent
Laboratories, Santa Clara, CA, USA. (2)Agilent Laboratories, Tel-Aviv, Israel,
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel, Blue Oak Software and
Agilent Laboratories, Santa Clara, CA, USA.

ENViz (Enrichment Analysis and Visualization) is a Cytoscape app that performs
joint enrichment analysis of two types of sample matched datasets in the context 
of systematic annotations. Such datasets may be gene expression or any other
high-throughput data collected in the same set of samples. The enrichment
analysis is done in the context of pathway information, gene ontology or any
custom annotation of the data. The results of the analysis consist of significant
associations between profiled elements of one of the datasets to the annotation
terms (e.g. miR-19 was associated to the cell-cycle process in breast cancer
samples). The results of the enrichment analysis are visualized as an interactive
Cytoscape network.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btu853 
PMCID: PMC4426829
PMID: 25577435  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Microarrays (Basel). 2015 Nov 27;4(4):647-70. doi: 10.3390/microarrays4040647.

Cancer Biomarkers from Genome-Scale DNA Methylation: Comparison of Evolutionary
and Semantic Analysis Methods.

Valavanis I(1), Pilalis E(2), Georgiadis P(3), Kyrtopoulos S(4), Chatziioannou
A(5).

Author information: 
(1)National Hellenic Research Foundation, Institute of Biology, Medicinal
Chemistry and Biotechnology, 48 Vassileos Constantinou Avenue, 11635 Athens,
Greece. ivalavan@eie.gr. (2)National Hellenic Research Foundation, Institute of
Biology, Medicinal Chemistry and Biotechnology, 48 Vassileos Constantinou Avenue,
11635 Athens, Greece. epilalis@eie.gr. (3)National Hellenic Research Foundation, 
Institute of Biology, Medicinal Chemistry and Biotechnology, 48 Vassileos
Constantinou Avenue, 11635 Athens, Greece. panosg@eie.gr. (4)National Hellenic
Research Foundation, Institute of Biology, Medicinal Chemistry and Biotechnology,
48 Vassileos Constantinou Avenue, 11635 Athens, Greece. skyrt@eie.gr. (5)National
Hellenic Research Foundation, Institute of Biology, Medicinal Chemistry and
Biotechnology, 48 Vassileos Constantinou Avenue, 11635 Athens, Greece.
achatzi@eie.gr.

DNA methylation profiling exploits microarray technologies, thus yielding a
wealth of high-volume data. Here, an intelligent framework is applied,
encompassing epidemiological genome-scale DNA methylation data produced from the 
Illumina's Infinium Human Methylation 450K Bead Chip platform, in an effort to
correlate interesting methylation patterns with cancer predisposition and, in
particular, breast cancer and B-cell lymphoma. Feature selection and
classification are employed in order to select, from an initial set of ~480,000
methylation measurements at CpG sites, predictive cancer epigenetic biomarkers
and assess their classification power for discriminating healthy versus cancer
related classes. Feature selection exploits evolutionary algorithms or a
graph-theoretic methodology which makes use of the semantics information included
in the Gene Ontology (GO) tree. The selected features, corresponding to
methylation of CpG sites, attained moderate-to-high classification accuracies
when imported to a series of classifiers evaluated by resampling or blindfold
validation. The semantics-driven selection revealed sets of CpG sites performing 
similarly with evolutionary selection in the classification tasks. However, gene 
enrichment and pathway analysis showed that it additionally provides more
descriptive sets of GO terms and KEGG pathways regarding the cancer phenotypes
studied here. Results support the expediency of this methodology regarding its
application in epidemiological studies.

DOI: 10.3390/microarrays4040647 
PMCID: PMC4996413
PMID: 27600245 


1. Gene. 2015 Feb 25;557(2):195-200. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2014.12.030. Epub 2014 Dec 
16.

Comprehensive expression analysis of miRNA in breast cancer at the miRNA and
isomiR levels.

Wu X(1), Zeng R(2), Wu S(2), Zhong J(3), Yang L(4), Xu J(5).

Author information: 
(1)The First Affiliated Hospital of Jinan University, Guangzhou 510630, China;
Department of Clinical Laboratory, Affiliated Hospital of Guangdong Medical
College, Zhanjiang, Guangdong 524001, China. (2)Orthopedic Center, Affiliated
Hospital of Guangdong Medical College, Zhanjiang, Guangdong 524001, China.
(3)Oncology Center, Affiliated Hospital of Guangdong Medical College, Zhanjiang, 
Guangdong 524001, China. (4)Clinical Research Center, Guangdong Medical College, 
Zhanjiang, Guangdong 524001, China. (5)Institute of Laboratory Medicine,
Guangdong Medical College, Dongguan 523808, China; Guangdong Provincial Key
Laboratory of Medical Molecular Diagnostics, Dongguan 523808, China. Electronic
address: junfaxucn@163.com.

Breast cancer (BC) is the main factor that leads cause of cancer death in women
worldwide. A class of small non-coding RNAs, microRNAs (miRNAs), has been widely 
studied in human cancers as crucial regulatory molecule. Recent studies indicate 
that a series of isomiRs can be yielded from a miRNA locus, and these
physiological miRNA isoforms have versatile roles in miRNA biogenesis. Herein, we
performed a comprehensive analysis of miRNAs at the miRNA and isomiR levels in BC
using next-generation sequencing data from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA).
Abnormally expressed miRNA (miR-21, miR-221, miR-155, miR-30e and miR-25) and
isomiR profiles could be obtained at the miRNA and isomiR levels, and similar
biological roles could be detected. IsomiR expression profiles should be further 
concerned, and especially isomiRs are actual regulatory molecules in the
miRNA-mRNA regulatory networks. The study provides a comprehensive expression
analysis at the miRNA and isomiR levels in BC, which indicates biological roles
of isomiRs.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gene.2014.12.030 
PMID: 25523096  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Cell Adh Migr. 2014;8(5):499-508. doi: 10.4161/cam.29284. Epub 2014 Oct 31.

EDI3 links choline metabolism to integrin expression, cell adhesion and
spreading.

Lesjak MS(1), Marchan R, Stewart JD, Rempel E, Rahnenführer J, Hengstler JG.

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Systems Toxicology ; Leibniz Research Centre for Working
Environment and Human Factors ; Dortmund , Germany.

Endometrial carcinoma differential 3 (EDI3) was the first member of the
glycerophosphodiesterase (GDE) protein family shown to be associated with cancer.
Our initial work demonstrated that endometrial and ovarian cancer patients with
primary tumors overexpressing EDI3 had a higher risk of developing metastasis and
decreased survival. Further analysis indicated that EDI3 cleaves
glycerophosphocholine to choline and glycerol-3-phosphate, increases the levels
of active PKC, and enhances the migratory activity of tumor cells. Despite these 
initial findings, EDI3 remained mainly uncharacterized. Therefore, to obtain an
overview of processes in which EDI3 may be involved, gene array analysis was
performed using MCF-7 breast cancer cells after EDI3 knockdown compared with a
non-targeting control siRNA. Several biological motifs were altered, including an
enrichment of genes involved in integrin-mediated signaling. More specifically,
silencing of EDI3 in MCF-7 and OVCAR-3 cells was associated with reduced
expression of the key receptor subunit integrin β1, leading to decreased cell
attachment and spreading accompanied by delayed formation of cell protrusions. To
confirm these results, we stably overexpressed EDI3 in MCF-7 cells which led to
elevated integrin β1 expression associated with enhanced cell attachment and
spreading - two processes critical for metastasis. In conclusion, our data
provide further insight into the role of EDI3 during cancer progression.

DOI: 10.4161/cam.29284 
PMCID: PMC4594537
PMID: 25482527  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Biomed Pharmacother. 2014 Oct;68(8):935-42. doi: 10.1016/j.biopha.2014.09.011.
Epub 2014 Oct 5.

miRNA expression patterns in chemoresistant breast cancer tissues.

Lv J(1), Xia K(2), Xu P(3), Sun E(3), Ma J(3), Gao S(3), Zhou Q(3), Zhang M(3),
Wang F(3), Chen F(3), Zhou P(3), Fu Z(4), Xie H(3).

Author information: 
(1)Yangzhou Maternal and Child Health Hospital, Affiliated with Yangzhou Medical 
University, 225002 Yangzhou, China. (2)The Affiliated Jiangyin Hospital of
Southeast University Medical College, 214400 Jiangyin, China. (3)Nanjing
Maternity and Child Health Medical Institute, Affiliated Nanjing Maternal and
Child Health Hospital, Nanjing Medical University, 210004 Nanjing, China.
(4)Nanjing Maternity and Child Health Medical Institute, Affiliated Nanjing
Maternal and Child Health Hospital, Nanjing Medical University, 210004 Nanjing,
China. Electronic address: xhfybj@163.com.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Breast cancer chemoresistance is a major obstacle to the
successful treatment of patients. miRNAs perform critical roles in biological
processes, including tumorigenesis and chemoresistance. However, little clinical 
data are available regarding the relationship between miRNA expression patterns
and breast cancer chemoresistance.
METHODS: We created a doxorubicin-resistant MCF-7 (MCF-/Adr) cell line using a
pulse-selection method; then verified the resistance of the MCF-7/Adr cell line
to doxorubicin by using the methyl thiazolyl tetrazolium (MTT) assay, terminal
deoxyribonucleotidyl transferase (TdT)-mediated dUTP nick-end labeling (TUNEL)
staining, and Intracellular doxorubicin accumulation assay. Then, we performed
qRT-PCR to detect the expression patterns of 14 selected miRNAs (which are
related to breast cancer resistance) in both cell lines. Subsequently, we
performed a bioinformatics analysis, including Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto
Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) analyses, to determine the putative
functions of 13 differentially expressed miRNA-targeted genes. Finally, we tested
the expression levels of these 13 miRNAs in 10 chemotherapy non-responder breast 
cancer tissues and 29 responder tissues. All statistical analyses were performed 
by a two-tailed Student's t-test, and a P value less than 0.05 was considered
statistically significant.
RESULTS: The results of the MTT assay showed that the MCF-7/Adr cell line was
significantly more resistant to doxorubicin compared to the MCF-7 cells The
results of the TUNEL assay indicated that doxorubicin induced an increase in the 
number apoptotic cells in the MCF-7 group. Additionally, the accumulation of
doxorubicin was higher in MCF-7 cells compared to MCF-7/Adr cells, which was
consistent with the MTT and TUNEL results. The qRT-PCR results demonstrated that 
compared to the parental MCF-7 cell line, miR-200a, miR-141, miR-200c, miR-31,
miR-429, and miR-196b were over-expressed, and let-7e, miR-576-3p, miR-125b-1,
miR-370, miR-145, miR-765, and miR-760 were significantly down-regulated in
MCF-7/Adr cells. The GO analysis results revealed that the predicted target genes
of these 14 miRNAs primarily regulated protein binding, zinc ion binding, DNA
binding, and transcription factor activity. The KEGG data demonstrated that these
target genes are mainly involved in the MAPK signaling pathway, regulation of the
actin cytoskeleton, cytokine-cytokine receptor interaction, and other signaling
pathways. Compared to the breast cancer tissues from chemotherapy responders, 10 
miRNAs were identified to be dysregulated in the chemoresistant breast cancer
tissues. Three of these miRNAs were up-regulated (miR-141, miR-200c, and miR-31),
and 7 were down-regulated (let-7e, miR-576-3p, miR-125b-1, miR-370, miR-145,
miR-765, and miR-760).
CONCLUSION: In this study, we identified 10 dysregulated miRNAs in both breast
cancer cells and chemoresistant tissues, which might be biomarkers for the
prognosis of breast cancer chemoresistance. Our study contributes to a
comprehensive understanding of prognostic biomarkers during clinical treatment,
and we hypothesize that the miRNA signatures of drug-resistant carcinoma tissues 
could be useful for developing new strategies for targeted therapies in patients 
with chemoresistant breast cancer.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biopha.2014.09.011 
PMID: 25451164  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Gene. 2015 Feb 10;556(2):113-8. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2014.11.046. Epub 2014 Nov
22.

MicroRNA expression profiling and bioinformatics analysis of dysregulated
microRNAs in vinorelbine-resistant breast cancer cells.

Zhong S(1), Ma T(1), Zhang X(1), Lv M(2), Chen L(3), Tang J(4), Zhao J(5).

Author information: 
(1)Center of Clinical Laboratory Science, Jiangsu Cancer Hospital Affiliated to
Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 210009, China. (2)The Fourth Clinical School 
of Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 210029, China. (3)Department of Oncology, 
Xuzhou Medical College, Xuzhou 221004, China. (4)Department of General Surgery,
Jiangsu Cancer Hospital Affiliated to Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 210009,
China. (5)Center of Clinical Laboratory Science, Jiangsu Cancer Hospital
Affiliated to Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 210009, China. Electronic
address: jhzhao2838@sina.com.

Vinorelbine (NVB) is one of the most active cytotoxic agents in breast cancer,
especially metastatic breast cancer. However, breast cancer patients who are
treated with the drug often develop resistance to it and some other drugs.
Recently studies have shown that microRNAs (miRNAs) play an important role in
drug resistance. In present study, miRNA expression profiles of breast cancer
cells MDA-MB-231/S and its NVB-resistant variant MDA-MB-231/NVB cells were
analyzed using microarray and the results were confirmed by real-time
quantitative polymerase chain reaction. Bioinformatic analyses were carried out
to predict gene targets of the dysregulated miRNAs and to analyze their potential
roles in the development of drug resistance. Here, 123 differentially expressed
miRNAs were identified in the resistant subline compared to MDA-MB-231/S.
Networks of KEGG pathways, Gene Ontology (GO) terms, and protein-protein
interaction (PPI) of 17 specific selected dysregulated miRNAs were constructed.
The results showed that MAPK, mTOR, Wnt, and TGF-beta signaling pathways and
several target genes such as CCND1, GRB2 and NT5E may associate with drug
resistance of breast cancer cells to NVB. In summary, this study demonstrates
that altered miRNA expression pattern is involved in acquiring resistance to NVB 
in breast cancer MDA-MB-231 cells. All these analysis results provided us a
comprehensive view of the function of differential expression miRNAs related to
drug resistance of breast cancer and may be helpful for the further study.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gene.2014.11.046 
PMID: 25445394  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Clin Chem. 2015 Jan;61(1):278-89. doi: 10.1373/clinchem.2014.229476. Epub 2014
Nov 19.

Gene expression profiling of circulating tumor cells in breast cancer.

Fina E(1), Callari M(1), Reduzzi C(1), D'Aiuto F(1), Mariani G(2), Generali D(3),
Pierotti MA(4), Daidone MG(5), Cappelletti V(1).

Author information: 
(1)Biomarkers Unit, Department of Experimental Oncology and Molecular Medicine.
(2)Medical Oncology Unit, and. (3)U.O. Multidisciplinare di Patologia Mammaria,
U.S. Terapia Molecolare e Farmacogenomica, A.O. Istituti Ospitalieri di Cremona, 
Cremona, Italy. (4)Scientific Directorate, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale
dei Tumori, Milan, Italy; (5)Biomarkers Unit, Department of Experimental Oncology
and Molecular Medicine, mariagrazia.daidone@istitutotumori.mi.it.

BACKGROUND: Determining the transcriptional profile of circulating tumor cells
(CTCs) may allow the acquisition of clinically relevant information while
overcoming tumor heterogeneity-related biases associated with use of tissue
samples for biomarker assessment. However, such molecular characterization is
challenging because CTCs are rare and outnumbered by blood cells.
METHODS: Here, we describe a technical protocol to measure the expression of >29 
000 genes in CTCs captured from whole blood with magnetic beads linked with
antibodies against epithelial cell adhesion molecule (EpCAM) and the
carcinoma-associated mucin, MUC1, designed to be used for CTC characterization in
clinical samples. Low numbers of cells (5-200) from the MCF7 and MDA-MB-468
breast cancer cell lines were spiked in healthy donor blood samples and isolated 
with the AdnaTest EMT-1/Stem CellSelect kit. Gene expression profiles (GEPs) were
obtained with the WG-DASL HT assay and compared with GEPs obtained from RNA
isolated from cultured cell lines and unspiked samples.
RESULTS: GEPs from samples containing 25 or more spiked cells correlated (r =
0.95) with cognate 100-ng RNA input samples, clustered separately from blood
control samples, and allowed MCF7 and MDA-MB-468 cells to be distinguished. GEPs 
with comparable technical quality were also obtained in a preliminary series of
clinical samples.
CONCLUSIONS: Our approach allows technically reliable GEPs to be obtained from
isolated CTCs for the acquisition of biologically useful information. It is
reproducible and suitable for application in prospective studies to assess the
clinical utility of CTC GEPs, provided that >25 CTCs can be isolated.

© 2014 American Association for Clinical Chemistry.

DOI: 10.1373/clinchem.2014.229476 
PMID: 25411184  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Pathol Oncol Res. 2015 Apr;21(2):469-75. doi: 10.1007/s12253-014-9851-1. Epub
2014 Nov 19.

Identification of differently expressed genes with specific SNP Loci for breast
cancer by the integration of SNP and gene expression profiling analyses.

Yuan P(1), Liu D, Deng M, Liu J, Wang J, Zhang L, Liu Q, Zhang T, Chen Y, Jin G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Breast Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Henan
University Science and Technology, Jinghua Road No. 24, Jianxi District, Luoyang 
City, 471003, China.

This study aims to explore the relationship between gene polymorphism and breast 
cancer, and to screen DEGs (differentially expressed genes) with SNPs (single
nucleotide polymorphisms) related to breast cancer. The SNPs of 17 patients and
the preprocessed SNP profiling GSE 32258 (38 cases of normal breast cells) were
combined to identify their correlation with breast cancer using chi-square test. 
The gene expression profiling batch8_9 (38 cases of patients and 8 cases of
normal tissue) was preprocessed with limma package, and the DEGs were filtered
out. Then fisher's method was applied to integrate DEGs and SNPs associated with 
breast cancer. With NetBox software, TRED (Transcriptional Regulatory Element
Database) and UCSC (University of California Santa Cruz) database,
genes-associated network and transcriptional regulatory network were constructed 
using cytoscape software. Further, GO (Gene Ontology) and KEGG analyses were
performed for genes in the networks by using siggenes. In total, 332 DEGs were
identified. There were 160 breast cancer-related SNPs related to 106 genes of
gene expression profiling (19 were significant DEGs). Finally, 11co-correlated
DEGs were selected. In genes-associated network, 9 significant DEGs were
correlated to 23 LINKER genes while, in transcriptional regulatory network, E2F1 
had regulatory relationships with 7 DEGs including MTUS1, CD44, CCNB1 and CCND2. 
KRAS with SNP locus of rs1137282 was involved in 35 KEGG pathways. The genes of
MTUS1, CD44, CCNB1, CCND2 and KRAS with specific SNP loci may be used as
biomarkers for diagnosis of breast cancer. Besides, E2F1 was recognized as the
transcription factor of 7 DEGs including MTUS1, CD44, CCNB1 and CCND2.

DOI: 10.1007/s12253-014-9851-1 
PMID: 25408372  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. PLoS One. 2014 Nov 12;9(11):e112561. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0112561.
eCollection 2014.

Somatic mutations favorable to patient survival are predominant in ovarian
carcinomas.

Zhang W(1), Edwards A(1), Flemington E(2), Zhang K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computer Science, Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans,
Louisiana, United States of America. (2)Tulane Cancer Center, Tulane School of
Medicine, New Orleans, Louisiana, United States of America.

Somatic mutation accumulation is a major cause of abnormal cell growth. However, 
some mutations in cancer cells may be deleterious to the survival and
proliferation of the cancer cells, thus offering a protective effect to the
patients. We investigated this hypothesis via a unique analysis of the clinical
and somatic mutation datasets of ovarian carcinomas published by the Cancer
Genome Atlas. We defined and screened 562 macro mutation signatures (MMSs) for
their associations with the overall survival of 320 ovarian cancer patients. Each
MMS measures the number of mutations present on the member genes (except for
TP53) covered by a specific Gene Ontology (GO) term in each tumor. We found that 
somatic mutations favorable to the patient survival are predominant in ovarian
carcinomas compared to those indicating poor clinical outcomes. Specially, we
identified 19 (3) predictive MMSs that are, usually by a nonlinear dose-dependent
effect, associated with good (poor) patient survival. The false discovery rate
for the 19 "positive" predictors is at the level of 0.15. The GO terms
corresponding to these MMSs include "lysosomal membrane" and "response to
hypoxia", each of which is relevant to the progression and therapy of cancer.
Using these MMSs as features, we established a classification tree model which
can effectively partition the training samples into three prognosis groups
regarding the survival time. We validated this model on an independent dataset of
the same disease (Log-rank p-value < 2.3 × 10(-4)) and a dataset of breast cancer
(Log-rank p-value < 9.3 × 10(-3)). We compared the GO terms corresponding to
these MMSs and those enriched with expression-based predictive genes. The
analysis showed that the GO term pairs with large similarity are mainly pertinent
to the proteins located on the cell organelles responsible for material transport
and waste disposal, suggesting the crucial role of these proteins in cancer
mortality.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0112561 
PMCID: PMC4229214
PMID: 25390899  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Nucl Recept Signal. 2014 Sep 12;12:e001. doi: 10.1621/nrs.12001. eCollection
2014.

Transcriptomic analysis identifies gene networks regulated by estrogen receptor α
(ERα) and ERβ that control distinct effects of different botanical estrogens.

Gong P, Madak-Erdogan Z, Li J(1), Cheng J(1), Greenlief CM(1), Helferich W,
Katzenellenbogen JA, Katzenellenbogen BS.

Author information: 
(1)Botanical Research Center, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO 65211.

The estrogen receptors (ERs) ERα and ERβ mediate the actions of endogenous
estrogens as well as those of botanical estrogens (BEs) present in plants. BEs
are ingested in the diet and also widely consumed by postmenopausal women as
dietary supplements, often as a substitute for the loss of endogenous estrogens
at menopause. However, their activities and efficacies, and similarities and
differences in gene expression programs with respect to endogenous estrogens such
as estradiol (E2) are not fully understood. Because gene expression patterns
underlie and control the broad physiological effects of estrogens, we have
investigated and compared the gene networks that are regulated by different BEs
and by E2. Our aim was to determine if the soy and licorice BEs control similar
or different gene expression programs and to compare their gene regulations with 
that of E2. Gene expression was examined by RNA-Seq in human breast cancer (MCF7)
cells treated with control vehicle, BE or E2. These cells contained three
different complements of ERs, ERα only, ERα+ERβ, or ERβ only, reflecting the
different ratios of these two receptors in different human breast cancers and in 
different estrogen target cells. Using principal component, hierarchical
clustering, and gene ontology and interactome analyses, we found that BEs
regulated many of the same genes as did E2. The genes regulated by each BE,
however, were somewhat different from one another, with some genes being
regulated uniquely by each compound. The overlap with E2 in regulated genes was
greatest for the soy isoflavones genistein and S-equol, while the greatest
difference from E2 in gene expression pattern was observed for the licorice root 
BE liquiritigenin. The gene expression pattern of each ligand depended greatly on
the cell background of ERs present. Despite similarities in gene expression
pattern with E2, the BEs were generally less stimulatory of genes promoting
proliferation and were more pro-apoptotic in their gene regulations than E2. The 
distinctive patterns of gene regulation by the individual BEs and E2 may underlie
differences in the activities of these soy and licorice-derived BEs in estrogen
target cells containing different levels of the two ERs.

DOI: 10.1621/nrs.12001 
PMCID: PMC4193135
PMID: 25363786  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. J Proteome Res. 2015 Jan 2;14(1):193-201. doi: 10.1021/pr500919w. Epub 2014 Nov
4.

Profiling global kinome signatures of the radioresistant MCF-7/C6 breast cancer
cells using MRM-based targeted proteomics.

Guo L(1), Xiao Y, Fan M, Li JJ, Wang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Environmental Toxicology Graduate Program and ‡Department of Chemistry,
University of California , Riverside, California 92521-0403, United States.

Comment in
    J Thorac Dis. 2016 Nov;8(11):E1470-E1472.

Ionizing radiation is widely used in cancer therapy; however, cancer cells often 
develop radioresistance, which compromises the efficacy of cancer radiation
therapy. Quantitative assessment of the alteration of the entire kinome in
radioresistant cancer cells relative to their radiosensitive counterparts may
provide important knowledge to define the mechanism(s) underlying tumor adaptive 
radioresistance and uncover novel target(s) for effective prevention and
treatment of tumor radioresistance. By employing a scheduled multiple-reaction
monitoring analysis in conjunction with isotope-coded ATP affinity probes, we
assessed the global kinome of radioresistant MCF-7/C6 cells and their parental
MCF-7 human breast cancer cells. We rigorously quantified 120 kinases, of which
(1)/3 exhibited significant differences in expression levels or ATP binding
affinities. Several kinases involved in cell cycle progression and DNA damage
response were found to be overexpressed or hyperactivated, including checkpoint
kinase 1 (CHK1), cyclin-dependent kinases 1 and 2 (CDK1 and CDK2), and the
catalytic subunit of DNA-dependent protein kinase. The elevated expression of
CHK1, CDK1, and CDK2 in MCF-7/C6 cells was further validated by Western blot
analysis. Thus, the altered kinome profile of radioresistant MCF-7/C6 cells
suggests the involvement of kinases on cell cycle progression and DNA repair in
tumor adaptive radioresistance. The unique kinome profiling results also afforded
potential effective targets for resensitizing radioresistant cancer cells and
counteracting deleterious effects of ionizing radiation exposure.

DOI: 10.1021/pr500919w 
PMCID: PMC4286165
PMID: 25341124  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. PLoS One. 2014 Oct 20;9(10):e109611. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0109611.
eCollection 2014.

The Long-HER study: clinical and molecular analysis of patients with HER2+
advanced breast cancer who become long-term survivors with trastuzumab-based
therapy.

Gámez-Pozo A(1), Pérez Carrión RM(2), Manso L(3), Crespo C(4), Mendiola C(3),
López-Vacas R(1), Berges-Soria J(1), López IÁ(5), Margeli M(6), Calero JL(7),
Farre XG(8), Santaballa A(9), Ciruelos EM(3), Afonso R(10), Lao J(11), Catalán
G(12), Gallego JV(13), López JM(14), Bofill FJ(15), Borrego MR(16), Espinosa
E(17), Vara JA(1), Zamora P(17).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Genética Médica y Molecular (INGEMM) - IdiPAZ, Hospital La Paz,
Madrid, Spain. (2)Medical Oncology Department, Hospital Quirón, Pozuelo de
Alarcón, Madrid, Spain. (3)Medical Oncology Department, Hospital 12 de Octubre,
Madrid, Spain. (4)Medical Oncology Department, Hospital Ramón y Cajal, Madrid,
Spain. (5)Medical Oncology Department, Hospital de Donostia, San Sebastián, Pais 
Vasco, Spain. (6)Medical Oncology Department, Hospital Germans Trias i Pujol,
Badalona, Barcelona, Spain. (7)Medical Oncology Department, Hospital Juan Ramón
Jiménez, Huelva, Spain. (8)Medical Oncology Department, Hospital Clinic de
Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. (9)Medical Oncology Department, Hospital La Fe,
Valencia, Spain. (10)Medical Oncology Department, Hospital Nuestra Señora de la
Candelaria, Santa Cruz de Tenerife, Spain. (11)Medical Oncology Department,
Hospital Miguel Servet, Zaragoza, Spain. (12)Medical Oncology Department,
Hospital Son Llàtzer, Palma de Mallorca, Spain. (13)Medical Oncology Department, 
Complejo Hospitalario de Zamora, Zamora, Spain. (14)Medical Oncology Department, 
Hospital Serranía de Ronda, Ronda, Málaga, Spain. (15)Medical Oncology
Department, Hospital Virgen de Valme, Sevilla, Spain. (16)Medical Oncology
Department, Hospital Virgen del Rocío, Sevilla, Spain. (17)Medical Oncology
Department, Hospital La Paz, Madrid, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Trastuzumab improves survival outcomes in patients with HER2+
metastatic breast cancer. The Long-Her study was designed to identify clinical
and molecular markers that could differentiate long-term survivors from patients 
having early progression after trastuzumab treatment.
METHODS: Data were collected from women with HER2-positive metastatic breast
cancer treated with trastuzumab that experienced a response or stable disease
during at least 3 years. Patients having a progression in the first year of
therapy with trastuzumab were used as a control. Genes related with trastuzumab
resistance were identified and investigated for network and gene functional
interrelation. Models predicting poor response to trastuzumab were constructed
and evaluated. Finally, a mutational status analysis of selected genes was
performed in HER2 positive breast cancer samples.
RESULTS: 103 patients were registered in the Long-HER study, of whom 71 had
obtained a durable complete response. Median age was 58 years. Metastatic disease
was diagnosed after a median of 24.7 months since primary diagnosis. Metastases
were present in the liver (25%), lungs (25%), bones (23%) and soft tissues (23%),
with 20% of patients having multiple locations of metastases. Median duration of 
response was 55 months. The molecular analysis included 35 patients from the
group with complete response and 18 patients in a control poor-response group.
Absence of trastuzumab as part of adjuvant therapy was the only clinical factor
associated with long-term survival. Gene ontology analysis demonstrated that PI3K
pathway was associated with poor response to trastuzumab-based therapy: tumours
in the control group usually had four or five alterations in this pathway,
whereas tumours in the Long-HER group had two alterations at most.
CONCLUSIONS: Trastuzumab may provide a substantial long-term survival benefit in 
a selected group of patients. Whole genome expression analysis comparing
long-term survivors vs. a control group predicted early progression after
trastuzumab-based therapy. Multiple alterations in genes related to the PI3K-mTOR
pathway seem to be required to confer resistance to this therapy.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0109611 
PMCID: PMC4203741
PMID: 25330188  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Breast Cancer Res. 2014 Oct 7;16(5):450. doi: 10.1186/s13058-014-0450-6.

DNA methylation profiling in the Carolina Breast Cancer Study defines cancer
subclasses differing in clinicopathologic characteristics and survival.

Conway K, Edmiston SN, May R, Kuan PF, Chu H, Bryant C, Tse CK, Swift-Scanlan T, 
Geradts J, Troester MA, Millikan RC.

INTRODUCTION: Breast cancer is a heterogeneous disease, with several intrinsic
subtypes differing by hormone receptor (HR) status, molecular profiles, and
prognosis. However, the role of DNA methylation in breast cancer development and 
progression and its relationship with the intrinsic tumor subtypes are not fully 
understood.
METHODS: A microarray targeting promoters of cancer-related genes was used to
evaluate DNA methylation at 935 CpG sites in 517 breast tumors from the Carolina 
Breast Cancer Study, a population-based study of invasive breast cancer.
RESULTS: Consensus clustering using methylation (β) values for the 167 most
variant CpG loci defined four clusters differing most distinctly in HR status,
intrinsic subtype (luminal versus basal-like), and p53 mutation status.
Supervised analyses for HR status, subtype, and p53 status identified 266
differentially methylated CpG loci with considerable overlap. Genes relatively
hypermethylated in HR+, luminal A, or p53 wild-type breast cancers included
FABP3, FGF2, FZD9, GAS7, HDAC9, HOXA11, MME, PAX6, POMC, PTGS2, RASSF1, RBP1, and
SCGB3A1, whereas those more highly methylated in HR-, basal-like, or p53 mutant
tumors included BCR, C4B, DAB2IP, MEST, RARA, SEPT5, TFF1, THY1, and SERPINA5.
Clustering also defined a hypermethylated luminal-enriched tumor cluster 3 that
gene ontology analysis revealed to be enriched for homeobox and other
developmental genes (ASCL2, DLK1, EYA4, GAS7, HOXA5, HOXA9, HOXB13, IHH, IPF1,
ISL1, PAX6, TBX1, SOX1, and SOX17). Although basal-enriched cluster 2 showed
worse short-term survival, the luminal-enriched cluster 3 showed worse long-term 
survival but was not independently prognostic in multivariate Cox proportional
hazard analysis, likely due to the mostly early stage cases in this dataset.
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrates that epigenetic patterns are strongly
associated with HR status, subtype, and p53 mutation status and may show
heterogeneity within tumor subclass. Among HR+ breast tumors, a subset exhibiting
a gene signature characterized by hypermethylation of developmental genes and
poorer clinicopathologic features may have prognostic value and requires further 
study. Genes differentially methylated between clinically important tumor subsets
have roles in differentiation, development, and tumor growth and may be critical 
to establishing and maintaining tumor phenotypes and clinical outcomes.

DOI: 10.1186/s13058-014-0450-6 
PMCID: PMC4303129
PMID: 25287138  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. J Obstet Gynaecol Res. 2015 Jan;41(1):132-40. doi: 10.1111/jog.12495. Epub 2014
Sep 17.

Analyzing the differentially expressed genes and pathway cross-talk in aggressive
breast cancer.

Chen WY(1), Wu F, You ZY, Zhang ZM, Guo YL, Zhong LX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang University, 
Nanchang, China.

AIM: The aim of this study was to explore the genes and pathways involved in the 
aggressive breast cancer cells.
METHODS: The gene expression profiles of GSE40057, including four aggressive
breast cell lines and six less aggressive cell lines, were downloaded from the
Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database. The gene differential expression analysis
was carried out with limma software with the method of Bayes for multiple tests. 
The gene ontology (GO) term enrichment and pathway cross-talk analysis were
performed with the online tool of DAVID and Cytoscape software.
RESULTS: A total of 401 differentially expressed genes (DEG), such as pentraxin 3
(PTX3), snail family zinc finger 2 (SNAI2), interleukin-8/6 (IL-8/6), osteonectin
(SPARC), matrix metallopeptidase-1 (MMP-1) and Ras-related protein Rab-25 (Rab
25), were identified between aggressive and less aggressive cell lines. They were
mainly enriched in the GO terms of response to wounding, negative regulation of
cell proliferation and calcium binding. Pathways in cancer dysfunctionally
interacted with glyoxylate and dicarboxylate metabolism (P < 0.0001), basal
transcription factors (P < 0.0001), tyrosine metabolism (P < 0.0001), calcium
signaling pathway (P = 0.0021), FcγR-mediated phagocytosis (P = 0.0022),
metabolism of xenobiotics by cytochrome P450 (P = 0.0097) and phagosome
(P = 0.0102).
CONCLUSION: The screened aggressive cancer-associated DEG (PTX3, SNAI2, IL-8/6,
SPARC, MMP-1 and Rab25) and significant pathways (calcium signaling pathway,
tyrosine metabolism, alanine, aspartate and glutamate metabolism) give us new
insights into the mechanism of aggressive breast cancer cells, and these DEG may 
become promising target genes in the treatment of metastatic breast cancer.

© 2014 The Authors. Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology Research © 2014 Japan
Society of Obstetrics and Gynecology.

DOI: 10.1111/jog.12495 
PMID: 25227254  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Int J Mol Sci. 2014 Sep 15;15(9):16284-301. doi: 10.3390/ijms150916284.

Synergistic effect of combinatorial treatment with curcumin and mitomycin C on
the induction of apoptosis of breast cancer cells: a cDNA microarray analysis.

Zhou QM(1), Chen QL(2), Du J(3), Wang XF(4), Lu YY(5), Zhang H(6), Su SB(7).

Author information: 
(1)Research Center for Traditional Chinese Medicine Complexity System, Shanghai
University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Shanghai 201203, China.
tazhou@163.com. (2)Research Center for Traditional Chinese Medicine Complexity
System, Shanghai University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Shanghai 201203,
China. cqlw1975@126.com. (3)Research Center for Traditional Chinese Medicine
Complexity System, Shanghai University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Shanghai 
201203, China. sbwsyt625@163.com. (4)Research Center for Traditional Chinese
Medicine Complexity System, Shanghai University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, 
Shanghai 201203, China. xiufengw@sina.com. (5)Research Center for Traditional
Chinese Medicine Complexity System, Shanghai University of Traditional Chinese
Medicine, Shanghai 201203, China. ava0048@163.com. (6)Research Center for
Traditional Chinese Medicine Complexity System, Shanghai University of
Traditional Chinese Medicine, Shanghai 201203, China. zhanghuiman@126.com.
(7)Research Center for Traditional Chinese Medicine Complexity System, Shanghai
University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Shanghai 201203, China.
ssb@shutcm.edu.cn.

In order to explore the synergistic mechanisms of combinatorial treatment using
curcumin and mitomycin C (MMC) for breast cancer, MCF-7 breast cancer xenografts 
were conducted to observe the synergistic effect of combinatorial treatment using
curcumin and MMC at various dosages. The synergistic mechanisms of combinatorial 
treatment using curcumin and MMC on the inhibition of tumor growth were explored 
by differential gene expression profile, gene ontology (GO), ingenuity pathway
analysis (IPA) and Signal-Net network analysis. The expression levels of selected
genes identified by cDNA microarray expression profiling were validated by
quantitative RT-PCR (qRT-PCR) and Western blot analysis. Effect of combinatorial 
treatment on the inhibition of cell growth was observed by MTT assay. Apoptosis
was detected by flow cytometric analysis and Hoechst 33258 staining. The
combinatorial treatment of 100 mg/kg curcumin and 1.5 mg/kg MMC revealed
synergistic inhibition on tumor growth. Among 1501 differentially expressed
genes, the expression of 25 genes exhibited an obvious change and a significant
difference in 27 signal pathways was observed (p<0.05). In addition, Mapk1 (ERK) 
and Mapk14 (MAPK p38) had more cross-interactions with other genes and revealed
an increase in expression by 8.14- and 11.84-fold, respectively during the
combinatorial treatment by curcumin and MMC when compared with the control.
Moreover, curcumin can synergistically improve tumoricidal effect of MMC in
another human breast cancer MDA-MB-231 cells. Apoptosis was significantly induced
by the combinatorial treatment (p<0.05) and significantly inhibited by ERK
inhibitor (PD98059) in MCF-7 cells (p<0.05). The synergistic effect of
combinatorial treatment by curcumin and MMC on the induction of apoptosis in
breast cancer cells may be via the ERK pathway.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms150916284 
PMCID: PMC4200820
PMID: 25226537  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Breast Cancer Res. 2014 Sep 12;16(5):436. doi: 10.1186/s13058-014-0436-4.

The forkhead transcription factor FOXM1 promotes endocrine resistance and
invasiveness in estrogen receptor-positive breast cancer by expansion of
stem-like cancer cells.

Bergamaschi A, Madak-Erdogan Z, Kim YJ, Choi YL, Lu H, Katzenellenbogen BS.

INTRODUCTION: The forkhead transcription factor FOXM1 coordinates expression of
cell cycle-related genes and plays a pivotal role in tumorigenesis and cancer
progression. We previously showed that FOXM1 acts downstream of 14-3-3ζ
signaling, the elevation of which correlates with a more aggressive tumor
phenotype. However, the role that FOXM1 might play in engendering resistance to
endocrine treatments in estrogen receptor-positive (ER+) patients when tumor
FOXM1 is high has not been clearly defined yet.
METHODS: We analyzed FOXM1 protein expression by immunohistochemistry in 501
ER-positive breast cancers. We also mapped genome-wide FOXM1, extracellular
signal-regulated kinase 2 and ERα binding events by chromatin immunoprecipitation
followed by high-throughput sequencing (ChIP-seq) in hormone-sensitive and
resistant breast cancer cells after tamoxifen treatment. These binding profiles
were integrated with gene expression data derived from cells before and after
FOXM1 knockdown to highlight specific FOXM1 transcriptional networks. We also
modulated the levels of FOXM1 and newly discovered FOXM1-regulated genes and
examined their impact on the cancer stem-like cell population and on cell
invasiveness and resistance to endocrine treatments.
RESULTS: FOXM1 protein expression was high in 20% of the tumors, which correlated
with significantly reduced survival in these patients (P = 0.003 by logrank
Mantel-Cox test). ChIP-seq analyses revealed that FOXM1 binding sites were
enriched at the transcription start site of genes involved in cell-cycle
progression, maintenance of stem cell properties, and invasion and metastasis,
all of which are associated with a poor prognosis in ERα-positive patients
treated with tamoxifen. Integration of binding profiles with gene expression
highlighted FOXM1 transcriptional networks controlling cell proliferation, stem
cell properties, invasion and metastasis. Increased expression of FOXM1 was
associated with an expansion of the cancer stem-like cell population and with
increased cell invasiveness and resistance to endocrine treatments. Use of a
selective FOXM1 inhibitor proved very effective in restoring endocrine therapy
sensitivity and decreasing breast cancer aggressiveness.
CONCLUSIONS: Collectively, our findings uncover novel roles for FOXM1 and
FOXM1-regulated genes in promoting cancer stem-like cell properties and therapy
resistance. They highlight the relevance of FOXM1 as a therapeutic target to be
considered for reducing invasiveness and enhancing breast cancer response to
endocrine treatments.

DOI: 10.1186/s13058-014-0436-4 
PMCID: PMC4303117
PMID: 25213081  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Front Immunol. 2014 Aug 25;5:404. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2014.00404. eCollection
2014.

Differential site accessibility mechanistically explains subcellular-specific
N-glycosylation determinants.

Lee LY(1), Lin CH(1), Fanayan S(1), Packer NH(1), Thaysen-Andersen M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biomolecular Sciences, Biomolecular Frontiers
Research Centre, Macquarie University , Sydney, NSW , Australia.

Glycoproteins perform extra- and intracellular functions in innate and adaptive
immunity by lectin-based interactions to exposed glyco-determinants. Herein, we
document and mechanistically explain the formation of subcellular-specific
N-glycosylation determinants on glycoproteins trafficking through the shared
biosynthetic machinery of human cells. LC-MS/MS-based quantitative glycomics
showed that the secreted glycoproteins of eight human breast epithelial cells
displaying diverse geno- and phenotypes consistently displayed more processed,
primarily complex type, N-glycans than the high-mannose-rich microsomal
glycoproteins. Detailed subcellular glycome profiling of proteins derived from
three breast cell lines (MCF7/MDA468/MCF10A) demonstrated that secreted
glycoproteins displayed significantly more α-sialylation and α1,6-fucosylation,
but less α-mannosylation, than both the intermediately glycan-processed
cell-surface glycoproteomes and the under-processed microsomal glycoproteomes.
Subcellular proteomics and gene ontology revealed substantial presence of
endoplasmic reticulum resident glycoproteins in the microsomes and confirmed
significant enrichment of secreted and cell-surface glycoproteins in the
respective subcellular fractions. The solvent accessibility of the glycosylation 
sites on maturely folded proteins of the 100 most abundant putative
N-glycoproteins observed uniquely in the three subcellular glycoproteomes
correlated with the glycan type processing thereby mechanistically explaining the
formation of subcellular-specific N-glycosylation. In conclusion, human cells
have developed mechanisms to simultaneously and reproducibly generate
subcellular-specific N-glycosylation using a shared biosynthetic machinery. This 
aspect of protein-specific glycosylation is important for structural and
functional glycobiology and discussed here in the context of the spatio-temporal 
interaction of glyco-determinants with lectins central to infection and immunity.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2014.00404 
PMCID: PMC4142333
PMID: 25202310 


1. Biomed Pharmacother. 2014 Jul;68(6):699-707. doi: 10.1016/j.biopha.2014.07.014.
Epub 2014 Jul 17.

Differential DNA methylation status between breast carcinomatous and normal
tissues.

Wang F(1), Yang Y(2), Fu Z(1), Xu N(3), Chen F(1), Yin H(1), Lu X(4), Shen R(1), 
Lu C(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Breast Surgery, Nanjing Maternity and Child Health Care
Hospital, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China. (2)Department of Radiology,
the Second Affiliated Hospital, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China.
(3)First Clinical Medicine College, Nanjing University of Chinese Medicine,
Nanjing, China. (4)Jinling High School, Nanjing, China. (5)Department of Breast
Surgery, Nanjing Maternity and Child Health Care Hospital, Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing, China. Electronic address: xianqu1981@126.com.

Breast cancer has been considered to be a multifactorial disease with a wide
array of well-characterized gene mutations and chromosomal abnormalities.
However, it is becoming evident that the onset or development of breast cancer
also depends on epigenetic factors, although the mechanisms have not been fully
elucidated. We performed a genome-wide analysis of DNA methylation of breast
carcinomatous tissues and paired normal tissues to examine the differences in
methylation between them. Methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction (MSP)
was used to validate the hypermethylated genes screened out by DNA methylation
microarray. We found that hypomethylation and hypermethylation occurred in 2753
and 1795 genes, respectively, in breast carcinomatous tissues. Meanwhile, gene
ontology analysis and ingenuity pathway analysis revealed the function and
pathway of several genes whose methylation status was altered in breast
carcinomatous tissues. In addition, we investigated the promoter methylation
status of four genes in breast carcinomatous tissue and paired normal tissues
(n=30) by MSP. Promoter hypermethylation of CRABP1, HOXB13, IFNGR2, and PIK3C3
was found in 37% (11/30), 23% (7/30), 17% (5/30), and 2% (2/30) of the
carcinomas, respectively. Mutation of these four important genes was critical to 
many types of cancer. Our results suggest that DNA methylation mechanisms may be 
involved in regulating the occurrence and development of breast cancer.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biopha.2014.07.014 
PMID: 25070394  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. BMC Syst Biol. 2014 Jul 5;8:81. doi: 10.1186/1752-0509-8-81.

Two-layer modular analysis of gene and protein networks in breast cancer.

Srivastava A(1), Kumar S, Ramaswamy R.

Author information: 
(1)C R RAO Advanced Institute of Mathematics, Statistics and Computer Science,
University of Hyderabad Campus, Hyderabad 500046, India. foralok@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Genomic, proteomic and high-throughput gene expression data, when
integrated, can be used to map the interaction networks between genes and
proteins. Different approaches have been used to analyze these networks,
especially in cancer, where mutations in biologically related genes that encode
mutually interacting proteins are believed to be involved. This system of
integrated networks as a whole exhibits emergent biological properties that are
not obvious at the individual network level. We analyze the system in terms of
modules, namely a set of densely interconnected nodes that can be further divided
into submodules that are expected to participate in multiple biological
activities in coordinated manner.
RESULTS: In the present work we construct two layers of the breast cancer
network: the gene layer, where the correlation network of breast cancer genes is 
analyzed to identify gene modules, and the protein layer, where each gene module 
is extended to map out the network of expressed proteins and their interactions
in order to identify submodules. Each module and its associated submodules are
analyzed to test the robustness of their topological distribution. The
constituent biological phenomena are explored through the use of the Gene
Ontology. We thus construct a "network of networks", and demonstrate that both
the gene and protein interaction networks are modular in nature. By focusing on
the ontological classification, we are able to determine the entire GO profiles
that are distributed at different levels of hierarchy. Within each submodule most
of the proteins are biologically correlated, and participate in groups of
distinct biological activities.
CONCLUSIONS: The present approach is an effective method for discovering coherent
gene modules and protein submodules. We show that this also provides a means of
determining biological pathways (both novel and as well those that have been
reported previously) that are related, in the present instance, to breast cancer.
Similar strategies are likely to be useful in the analysis of other diseases as
well.

DOI: 10.1186/1752-0509-8-81 
PMCID: PMC4105126
PMID: 24997799  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. BMC Genomics. 2014 Jun 24;15:520. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-520.

Global analysis of ZNF217 chromatin occupancy in the breast cancer cell genome
reveals an association with ERalpha.

Frietze S(1), O'Geen H, Littlepage LE, Simion C, Sweeney CA, Farnham PJ, Krig SR.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, University of Northern Colorado, Greeley, CO
80639, USA. seth.frietze@unco.edu.

BACKGROUND: The ZNF217 gene, encoding a C2H2 zinc finger protein, is located at
20q13 and found amplified and overexpressed in greater than 20% of breast tumors.
Current studies indicate ZNF217 drives tumorigenesis, yet the regulatory
mechanisms of ZNF217 are largely unknown. Because ZNF217 associates with
chromatin modifying enzymes, we postulate that ZNF217 functions to regulate
specific gene signaling networks. Here, we present a large-scale functional
genomic analysis of ZNF217, which provides insights into the regulatory role of
ZNF217 in MCF7 breast cancer cells.
RESULTS: ChIP-seq analysis reveals that the majority of ZNF217 binding sites are 
located at distal regulatory regions associated with the chromatin marks H3K27ac 
and H3K4me1. Analysis of ChIP-seq transcription factor binding sites shows
clustering of ZNF217 with FOXA1, GATA3 and ERalpha binding sites, supported by
the enrichment of corresponding motifs for the ERalpha-associated cis-regulatory 
sequences. ERalpha expression highly correlates with ZNF217 in lysates from
breast tumors (n = 15), and ERalpha co-precipitates ZNF217 and its binding
partner CtBP2 from nuclear extracts. Transcriptome profiling following ZNF217
depletion identifies differentially expressed genes co-bound by ZNF217 and
ERalpha; gene ontology suggests a role for ZNF217-ERalpha in expression programs 
associated with ER+ breast cancer studies found in the Molecular Signature
Database. Data-mining of expression data from breast cancer patients correlates
ZNF217 with reduced overall survival.
CONCLUSIONS: Our genome-wide ZNF217 data suggests a functional role for ZNF217 at
ERalpha target genes. Future studies will investigate whether ZNF217 expression
contributes to aberrant ERalpha regulatory events in ER+ breast cancer and
hormone resistance.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-520 
PMCID: PMC4082627
PMID: 24962896  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. J Obstet Gynaecol. 2014 Oct;34(7):630-3. doi: 10.3109/01443615.2014.920782. Epub 
2014 Jun 12.

Meta-analysis of the differentially expressed breast cancer-related microRNA
expression profiles.

Wu J(1), Lu P, Yang T, Wang L.

Author information: 
(1)Breast Cancer Diagnosis and Treatment Center Henan.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs), as non-coding RNA molecules, play an important role in
regulating gene expression in cancer development. Meta-analysis was used to
screen overlapping differentially expressed miRNAs (DEmiRNAs) in three studies.
The miRanda was used to identify target genes related to overlapping DEmiRNAs.
These Gene Ontology (GO) and Encyclopaedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database
were applied to further predict the function of these target genes. As a result, 
we obtained seven overlapping miRNAs and six significantly over-represented GO
terms closely related to breast cancer. After KEGG pathways analysis, a total of 
seven key target genes were involved in the Wnt signalling pathway (p = 0.0002). 
Our findings from this study suggest that the altered levels of miRNAs might have
great potential to serve as novel, non-invasive biomarkers for early detection of
breast cancer.

DOI: 10.3109/01443615.2014.920782 
PMID: 24922277  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Clin Cancer Res. 2014 Aug 1;20(15):3962-73. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-13-1378.
Epub 2014 Jun 10.

Differences in the transcriptional response to fulvestrant and estrogen
deprivation in ER-positive breast cancer.

Patani N(1), Dunbier AK(2), Anderson H(3), Ghazoui Z(4), Ribas R(3), Anderson
E(5), Gao Q(3), A'hern R(6), Mackay A(3), Lindemann J(7), Wellings R(7), Walker
J(7), Kuter I(8), Martin LA(3), Dowsett M(9).

Author information: 
(1)Academic Biochemistry, Royal Marsden Foundation Trust; Breakthrough Breast
Cancer Research Centre, Institute of Cancer Research, London; (2)Academic
Biochemistry, Royal Marsden Foundation Trust; Department of Biochemistry,
University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand; (3)Breakthrough Breast Cancer Research
Centre, Institute of Cancer Research, London; (4)Academic Biochemistry, Royal
Marsden Foundation Trust; (5)AstraZeneca, Macclesfield; Boehringer Ingelheim,
Vienna, Austria; and. (6)Clinical Trials and Statistics Unit, Institute of Cancer
Research, Sutton, United Kingdom; (7)AstraZeneca, Macclesfield; (8)Massachusetts 
General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts. (9)Academic Biochemistry, Royal Marsden 
Foundation Trust; Breakthrough Breast Cancer Research Centre, Institute of Cancer
Research, London; Mitch.Dowsett@icr.ac.uk.

PURPOSE: Endocrine therapies include aromatase inhibitors and the selective
estrogen receptor (ER) downregulator fulvestrant. This study aimed to determine
whether the reported efficacy of fulvestrant over anastrozole, and high- over
low-dose fulvestrant, reflect distinct transcriptional responses.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Global gene expression profiles from ERα-positive breast
carcinomas before and during presurgical treatment with fulvestrant (n = 22) or
anastrozole (n = 81), and corresponding in vitro models, were compared.
Transcripts responding differently to fulvestrant and estrogen deprivation were
identified and integrated using Gene Ontology, pathway and network analyses to
evaluate their potential significance.
RESULTS: The overall transcriptional response to fulvestrant and estrogen
deprivation was correlated (r = 0.61 in presurgical studies, r = 0.87 in vitro), 
involving downregulation of estrogen-regulated and proliferation-associated
genes. The transcriptional response to fulvestrant was of greater magnitude than 
estrogen deprivation (slope = 0.62 in presurgical studies, slope = 0.63 in
vitro). Comparative analyses identified 28 genes and 40 Gene Ontology categories 
affected differentially by fulvestrant. Seventeen fulvestrant-specific genes,
including CAV1/2, SNAI2, and NRP1, associated with ERα, androgen receptor (AR),
and TP53, in a network regulating cell cycle, death, survival, and tumor
morphology. Eighteen genes responding differently to fulvestrant specifically
predicted antiproliferative response to fulvestrant, but not anastrozole.
Transcriptional effects of low-dose fulvestrant correlated with high-dose
treatment, but were of lower magnitude (ratio = 0.29).
CONCLUSIONS: The transcriptional response to fulvestrant has much in common with 
estrogen deprivation, but is stronger with distinctions potentially attributable 
to arrest of estrogen-independent ERα activity and involvement of AR signaling.
Genes responding differently to fulvestrant may have predictive utility. These
data are consistent with the clinical efficacy of fulvestrant versus anastrozole 
and higher dosing regimens.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-13-1378 
PMCID: PMC4119788
PMID: 24916694  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Breast Cancer Res. 2014 May 8;16(3):R46. doi: 10.1186/bcr3653.

Polarity gene alterations in pure invasive micropapillary carcinomas of the
breast.

Gruel N, Benhamo V, Bhalshankar J, Popova T, Fréneaux P, Arnould L, Mariani O,
Stern MH, Raynal V, Sastre-Garau X, Rouzier R, Delattre O, Vincent-Salomon A.

INTRODUCTION: Pure invasive micropapillary carcinoma (IMPC) is a special type of 
breast carcinoma characterised by clusters of cells presenting polarity
abnormalities. The biological alterations underlying this pattern remain unknown.
METHODS: Pangenomic analysis (n=39), TP53 (n=43) and PIK3CA (n=41) sequencing in 
a series of IMPCs were performed. A subset of cases was also analysed with
whole-exome sequencing (n=4) and RNA sequencing (n=6). Copy number variation
profiles were compared with those of oestrogen receptors and grade-matched
invasive ductal carcinomas (IDCs) of no special type.
RESULTS: Unsupervised analysis of genomic data distinguished two IMPC subsets:
one (Sawtooth/8/16) exhibited a significant increase in 16p gains (71%), and the 
other (Firestorm/Amplifier) was characterised by a high frequency of 8q (35%),
17q (20% to 46%) and 20q (23% to 30%) amplifications and 17p loss (74%). TP53
mutations (10%) were more frequently identified in the amplifier subset, and
PIK3CA mutations (4%) were detected in both subsets. Compared to IDC, IMPC
exhibited specific loss of the 6q16-q22 region (45%), which is associated with
downregulation of FOXO3 and SEC63 gene expression. SEC63 and FOXO3 missense
mutations were identified in one case each (2%). Whole-exome sequencing combined 
with RNA sequencing of IMPC allowed us to identify somatic mutations in genes
involved in polarity, DNAH9 and FMN2 (8% and 2%, respectively) or ciliogenesis,
BBS12 and BBS9 (2% each) or genes coding for endoplasmic reticulum protein,
HSP90B1 and SPTLC3 (2% each) and cytoskeleton, UBR4 and PTPN21 (2% each),
regardless of the genomic subset. The intracellular biological function of the
mutated genes identified by gene ontology analysis suggests a driving role in the
clinicopathological characteristics of IMPC.
CONCLUSION: In our comprehensive molecular analysis of IMPC, we identified
numerous genomic alterations without any recurrent fusion genes. Recurrent
somatic mutations of genes participating in cellular polarity and shape suggest
that they, together with other biological alterations (such as epigenetic
modifications and stromal alterations), could contribute to the morphological
pattern of IMPC. Though none of the individual abnormalities demonstrated
specificity for IMPC, whether their combination in IMPC may have a cumulative
effect that drives the abnormal polarity of IMPC needs to be examined further
with in vitro experiments.

DOI: 10.1186/bcr3653 
PMCID: PMC4095699
PMID: 24887297  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. PLoS One. 2014 Jun 2;9(6):e98229. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0098229. eCollection 
2014.

Systematic pathway enrichment analysis of a genome-wide association study on
breast cancer survival reveals an influence of genes involved in cell adhesion
and calcium signaling on the patients' clinical outcome.

Woltmann A(1), Chen B(1), Lascorz J(1), Johansson R(2), Eyfjörd JE(3), Hamann
U(4), Manjer J(5), Enquist-Olsson K(6), Henriksson R(7), Herms S(8), Hoffmann
P(8), Hemminki K(9), Lenner P(2), Försti A(9).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Genetic Epidemiology, German Cancer Research Center
(DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany. (2)Department of Radiation Sciences & Oncology, Umeå
University, Umeå, Sweden. (3)Cancer Research Laboratory, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland. (4)Molecular Genetics of Breast
Cancer, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany. (5)The Malmö
Diet and Cancer Study, Lund University, Malmö, Sweden; Department of Plastic
Surgery, Skåne University Hospital, Malmö, Lund University, Malmö, Sweden.
(6)Department of Public Health and Clinical Medicine/Nutritional, Research, Umeå 
University, Umeå, Sweden. (7)Department of Radiation Sciences & Oncology, Umeå
University, Umeå, Sweden; Cancer Center Stockholm Gotland, Stockholm, Sweden.
(8)Institute of Human Genetics, Department of Genomics, University of Bonn, Bonn,
Germany; Division of Medical Genetics and Department of Biomedicine, University
of Basel, Basel, Switzerland. (9)Division of Molecular Genetic Epidemiology,
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany; Center for Primary
Health Care Research, Clinical Research Center, Lund University, Malmö, Sweden.

Genome-wide association studies (GWASs) may help to understand the effects of
genetic polymorphisms on breast cancer (BC) progression and survival. However,
they give only a focused view, which cannot capture the tremendous complexity of 
this disease. Therefore, we investigated data from a previously conducted GWAS on
BC survival for enriched pathways by different enrichment analysis tools using
the two main annotation databases Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of
Genes and Genomes (KEGG). The goal was to identify the functional categories (GO 
terms and KEGG pathways) that are consistently overrepresented in a statistically
significant way in the list of genes generated from the single nucleotide
polymorphism (SNP) data. The SNPs with allelic p-value cut-offs 0.005 and 0.01
were annotated to the genes by excluding or including a 20 kb up-and down-stream 
sequence of the genes and analyzed by six different tools. We identified eleven
consistently enriched categories, the most significant ones relating to cell
adhesion and calcium ion binding. Moreover, we investigated the similarity
between our GWAS and the enrichment analyses of twelve published gene expression 
signatures for breast cancer prognosis. Five of them were commonly used and
commercially available, five were based on different aspects of metastasis
formation and two were developed from meta-analyses of published prognostic
signatures. This comparison revealed similarities between our GWAS data and the
general and the specific brain metastasis gene signatures as well as the Oncotype
DX signature. As metastasis formation is a strong indicator of a patient's
prognosis, this result reflects the survival aspect of the conducted GWAS and
supports cell adhesion and calcium signaling as important pathways in cancer
progression.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0098229 
PMCID: PMC4041745
PMID: 24886783  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2014 Jul;146(1):41-50. doi: 10.1007/s10549-014-2978-7.
Epub 2014 May 27.

The metastatic potential of triple-negative breast cancer is decreased via
caloric restriction-mediated reduction of the miR-17~92 cluster.

Jin L(1), Lim M, Zhao S, Sano Y, Simone BA, Savage JE, Wickstrom E, Camphausen K,
Pestell RG, Simone NL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Thomas Jefferson University, Phiadelphia,
PA, 19107, USA.

Caloric restriction (CR) has been shown to cause tumor regression in models of
triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC), and the regression is augmented when
coupled with ionizing radiation (IR). In this study, we sought to determine if
the molecular interaction between CR and IR could be mediated by microRNA (miR). 
miR arrays revealed 3 miRs in the miR-17~92 cluster as most significantly down
regulated when CR is combined with IR. In vivo, CR and IR down regulated
miR-17/20 in 2 TNBC models. To elucidate the mechanism by which this cluster
regulates the response to CR, cDNA arrays were performed and the top 5
statistically significant gene ontology terms with high fold changes were all
associated with extracellular matrix (ECM) and metastases. In silico analysis
revealed 4 potential targets of the miR-17~92 cluster related to ECM: collagen 4 
alpha 3, laminin alpha 3, and metallopeptidase inhibitors 2 and 3, which were
confirmed by luciferase assays. The overexpression or silencing of miR-17/20a
demonstrated that those miRs directly affected the ECM proteins. Furthermore, we 
found that CR-mediated inhibition of miR-17/20a can regulate the expression of
ECM proteins. Functionally, we demonstrate that CR decreases the metastatic
potential of cells which further demonstrates the importance of the ECM. In
conclusion, CR can be used as a potential treatment for cancer because it may
alter many molecular targets concurrently and decrease metastatic potential for
TNBC.

DOI: 10.1007/s10549-014-2978-7 
PMCID: PMC4157915
PMID: 24863696  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Anticancer Res. 2014 May;34(5):2173-83.

Gene expression profiling of epithelial-mesenchymal transition in primary breast 
cancer cell culture.

Minafra L(1), Bravatà V, Forte GI, Cammarata FP, Gilardi MC, Messa C.

Author information: 
(1)Contrada Pietrapollastra-Pisciotto, 90015-Cefalù, PA, Italy.
luigi.minafra@ibfm.cnr.it, valentina.bravata@ibfm.cnr.it.

BACKGROUND/AIM: Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a process co-opted by 
cancer cells to invade and form metastases. In the present study we analyzed gene
expression profiles of primary breast cancer cells in culture in order to
highlight genes related to EMT.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Microarray expression analysis of primary cells isolated
from a specimen of a patient with an infiltrating ductal carcinoma of the breast 
was performed. Real-Time Quantitative Reverse Transcription PCR (qRT-PCR)
analyses validated microarray gene expression trends.
RESULTS: Thirty-six candidate genes were selected and used to generate a
molecular network displaying the tight relationship among them. The most
significant Gene Ontology biological processes characterizing this network were
involved in cell migration and motility.
CONCLUSION: Our data revealed the involvement of new genes which displayed tight 
relationships among them, suggesting a molecular network in which they could
contribute to control of EMT in breast cancer. This study may offer a basis for
understanding complex mechanisms which regulate breast cancer progression and for
designing individualized anticancer therapies.


PMID: 24778019  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. BMC Cancer. 2014 Apr 22;14:275. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-14-275.

Expression microarray identifies the unliganded glucocorticoid receptor as a
regulator of gene expression in mammary epithelial cells.

Ritter HD, Mueller CR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Queen's Cancer Research Institute, Queen's University, Kingston, Ontario,
Canada K7L 3N6. muellerc@queensu.ca.

BACKGROUND: While glucocorticoids and the liganded glucocorticoid receptor (GR)
have a well-established role in the maintenance of differentiation and
suppression of apoptosis in breast tissue, the involvement of unliganded GR in
cellular processes is less clear. Our previous studies implicated unliganded GR
as a positive regulator of the BRCA1 tumour suppressor gene in the absence of
glucocorticoid hormone, which suggested it could play a similar role in the
regulation of other genes.
METHODS: An shRNA vector directed against GR was used to create mouse mammary
cell lines with depleted endogenous levels of this receptor in order to further
characterize the role of GR in breast cells. An expression microarray screen for 
targets of unliganded GR was performed using our GR-depleted cell lines
maintained in the absence of glucocorticoids. Candidate genes positively
regulated by unliganded GR were identified, classified by Gene Ontology and
Ingenuity Pathway Analysis, and validated using quantitative real-time reverse
transcriptase PCR. Chromatin immunoprecipitation and dual luciferase expression
assays were conducted to further investigate the mechanism through which
unliganded GR regulates these genes.
RESULTS: Expression microarray analysis revealed 260 targets negatively regulated
and 343 targets positively regulated by unliganded GR. A number of the positively
regulated targets were involved in pro-apoptotic networks, possibly opposing the 
activity of liganded GR targets. Validation and further analysis of five
candidates from the microarray indicated that two of these, Hsd11b1 and Ch25h,
were regulated by unliganded GR in a manner similar to Brca1 during
glucocorticoid treatment. Furthermore, GR was shown to interact directly with and
upregulate the Ch25h promoter in the absence, but not the presence, of
hydrocortisone (HC), confirming our previously described model of gene regulation
by unliganded GR.
CONCLUSION: This work presents the first identification of targets of unliganded 
GR. We propose that the balance between targets of liganded and unliganded GR
signaling is responsible for controlling differentiation and apoptosis,
respectively, and suggest that gene regulation by unliganded GR may represent a
mechanism for reducing the risk of breast tumourigenesis by the elimination of
abnormal cells.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2407-14-275 
PMCID: PMC4021255
PMID: 24755251  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. PLoS One. 2014 Apr 14;9(4):e94686. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0094686. eCollection
2014.

Analysis of the robustness of network-based disease-gene prioritization methods
reveals redundancy in the human interactome and functional diversity of
disease-genes.

Guney E(1), Oliva B(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Complex Network Research, Northeastern University, Boston,
Massachusetts, United States of America. (2)Structural Bioinformatics Group
(GRIB), Departament de Ciències Experimentals i de la Salut, Universitat Pompeu
Fabra, Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain.

Complex biological systems usually pose a trade-off between robustness and
fragility where a small number of perturbations can substantially disrupt the
system. Although biological systems are robust against changes in many external
and internal conditions, even a single mutation can perturb the system
substantially, giving rise to a pathophenotype. Recent advances in identifying
and analyzing the sequential variations beneath human disorders help to
comprehend a systemic view of the mechanisms underlying various disease
phenotypes. Network-based disease-gene prioritization methods rank the relevance 
of genes in a disease under the hypothesis that genes whose proteins interact
with each other tend to exhibit similar phenotypes. In this study, we have tested
the robustness of several network-based disease-gene prioritization methods with 
respect to the perturbations of the system using various disease phenotypes from 
the Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man database. These perturbations have been
introduced either in the protein-protein interaction network or in the set of
known disease-gene associations. As the network-based disease-gene prioritization
methods are based on the connectivity between known disease-gene associations, we
have further used these methods to categorize the pathophenotypes with respect to
the recoverability of hidden disease-genes. Our results have suggested that, in
general, disease-genes are connected through multiple paths in the human
interactome. Moreover, even when these paths are disturbed, network-based
prioritization can reveal hidden disease-gene associations in some
pathophenotypes such as breast cancer, cardiomyopathy, diabetes, leukemia,
parkinson disease and obesity to a greater extend compared to the rest of the
pathophenotypes tested in this study. Gene Ontology (GO) analysis highlighted the
role of functional diversity for such diseases.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0094686 
PMCID: PMC3986215
PMID: 24733074  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Algorithms Mol Biol. 2014 Apr 3;9(1):10. doi: 10.1186/1748-7188-9-10.

Predicting gene ontology annotations of orphan GWAS genes using protein-protein
interactions.

Kuppuswamy U, Ananthasubramanian S, Wang Y, Balakrishnan N, Ganapathiraju MK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Informatics and Intelligent Systems Program,
University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA. madhavi@pitt.edu.

BACKGROUND: The number of genome-wide association studies (GWAS) has increased
rapidly in the past couple of years, resulting in the identification of genes
associated with different diseases. The next step in translating these findings
into biomedically useful information is to find out the mechanism of the action
of these genes. However, GWAS studies often implicate genes whose functions are
currently unknown; for example, MYEOV, ANKLE1, TMEM45B and ORAOV1 are found to be
associated with breast cancer, but their molecular function is unknown.
RESULTS: We carried out Bayesian inference of Gene Ontology (GO) term annotations
of genes by employing the directed acyclic graph structure of GO and the network 
of protein-protein interactions (PPIs). The approach is designed based on the
fact that two proteins that interact biophysically would be in physical proximity
of each other, would possess complementary molecular function, and play role in
related biological processes. Predicted GO terms were ranked according to their
relative association scores and the approach was evaluated quantitatively by
plotting the precision versus recall values and F-scores (the harmonic mean of
precision and recall) versus varying thresholds. Precisions of ~58% and ~ 40% for
localization and functions respectively of proteins were determined at a
threshold of ~30 (top 30 GO terms in the ranked list). Comparison with function
prediction based on semantic similarity among nodes in an ontology and
incorporation of those similarities in a k-nearest neighbor classifier confirmed 
that our results compared favorably.
CONCLUSIONS: This approach was applied to predict the cellular component and
molecular function GO terms of all human proteins that have interacting partners 
possessing at least one known GO annotation. The list of predictions is available
at http://severus.dbmi.pitt.edu/engo/GOPRED.html. We present the algorithm,
evaluations and the results of the computational predictions, especially for
genes identified in GWAS studies to be associated with diseases, which are of
translational interest.

DOI: 10.1186/1748-7188-9-10 
PMCID: PMC4124845
PMID: 24708602 


1. Biomed Res Int. 2014;2014:978984. doi: 10.1155/2014/978984. Epub 2014 Feb 3.

The role of PinX1 in growth control of breast cancer cells and its potential
molecular mechanism by mRNA and lncRNA expression profiles screening.

Shi R(1), Zhou JY(1), Zhou H(1), Zhao Z(2), Liang SH(1), Zheng WL(1), Ma WL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetic Engineering, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou
510515, China. (2)Nan Fang Hospital, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou
510515, China.

As a major tumor suppressor gene, the role of PinX1 in breast cancer and its
molecular mechanism remain unclear. In this study, overexpression of PinX1 was
generated in 3 breast cancer cell lines, and knockdown of PinX1 was performed in 
a nontumorigenic breast cell line. The regulation of PinX1 on cell proliferation 
and cell cycle was observed. A microarray-based lncRNA and mRNA expression
profile screening was also performed. We found a lower growth rate, G0/G1 phase
arrest, and S phase inhibition in the PinX1 overexpressed breast cancer cells,
while a higher growth rate, decreased G0/G1 phase, and increased S phase rate in 
the PinX1 knocked-down nontumorigenic breast cell. A total of 977 mRNAs and 631
lncRNAs were identified as differentially expressed transcripts between PinX1
overexpressed and control MCF-7 cells. Further analysis identified the
involvement of these mRNAs in 52 cancer related pathways and various other
biological processes. 11 enhancer-like lncRNAs and 25 lincRNAs with their
adjacent mRNA pairs were identified as coregulated transcripts. Our results
confirmed the role of PinX1 as a major tumor suppressor gene in breast cancer
cell lines and provided information for further research on the molecular
mechanisms of PinX1 in tumorigenesis.

DOI: 10.1155/2014/978984 
PMCID: PMC3929369
PMID: 24672800  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 20;9(3):e90801. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0090801. eCollection
2014.

Biclustering methods: biological relevance and application in gene expression
analysis.

Oghabian A(1), Kilpinen S(2), Hautaniemi S(3), Czeizler E(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biotechnology, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
(2)Institute of Molecular Medicine for Finland (FIMM), University of Helsinki,
Helsinki, Finland. (3)Institute of Biomedicine and Genome-Scale Biology Research 
Program, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. (4)Department of Computer
Science and Engineering, Aalto University, Espoo, Finland.

DNA microarray technologies are used extensively to profile the expression levels
of thousands of genes under various conditions, yielding extremely large
data-matrices. Thus, analyzing this information and extracting biologically
relevant knowledge becomes a considerable challenge. A classical approach for
tackling this challenge is to use clustering (also known as one-way clustering)
methods where genes (or respectively samples) are grouped together based on the
similarity of their expression profiles across the set of all samples (or
respectively genes). An alternative approach is to develop biclustering methods
to identify local patterns in the data. These methods extract subgroups of genes 
that are co-expressed across only a subset of samples and may feature important
biological or medical implications. In this study we evaluate 13 biclustering and
2 clustering (k-means and hierarchical) methods. We use several approaches to
compare their performance on two real gene expression data sets. For this purpose
we apply four evaluation measures in our analysis: (1) we examine how well the
considered (bi)clustering methods differentiate various sample types; (2) we
evaluate how well the groups of genes discovered by the (bi)clustering methods
are annotated with similar Gene Ontology categories; (3) we evaluate the
capability of the methods to differentiate genes that are known to be specific to
the particular sample types we study and (4) we compare the running time of the
algorithms. In the end, we conclude that as long as the samples are well defined 
and annotated, the contamination of the samples is limited, and the samples are
well replicated, biclustering methods such as Plaid and SAMBA are useful for
discovering relevant subsets of genes and samples.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0090801 
PMCID: PMC3961251
PMID: 24651574  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Apr 1;111(13):4892-7. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1315445111. Epub 2014 Mar 17.

Genome-wide activity of unliganded estrogen receptor-α in breast cancer cells.

Caizzi L(1), Ferrero G, Cutrupi S, Cordero F, Ballaré C, Miano V, Reineri S,
Ricci L, Friard O, Testori A, Corà D, Caselle M, Di Croce L, De Bortoli M.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Systems Biology, University of Turin, 10043 Orbassano,
Turin, Italy.

Estrogen receptor-α (ERα) has central role in hormone-dependent breast cancer and
its ligand-induced functions have been extensively characterized. However,
evidence exists that ERα has functions that are independent of ligands. In the
present work, we investigated the binding of ERα to chromatin in the absence of
ligands and its functions on gene regulation. We demonstrated that in MCF7 breast
cancer cells unliganded ERα binds to more than 4,000 chromatin sites.
Unexpectedly, although almost entirely comprised in the larger group of
estrogen-induced binding sites, we found that unliganded-ERα binding is
specifically linked to genes with developmental functions, compared with
estrogen-induced binding. Moreover, we found that siRNA-mediated down-regulation 
of ERα in absence of estrogen is accompanied by changes in the expression levels 
of hundreds of coding and noncoding RNAs. Down-regulated mRNAs showed enrichment 
in genes related to epithelial cell growth and development. Stable ERα
down-regulation using shRNA, which caused cell growth arrest, was accompanied by 
increased H3K27me3 at ERα binding sites. Finally, we found that FOXA1 and AP2γ
binding to several sites is decreased upon ERα silencing, suggesting that
unliganded ERα participates, together with other factors, in the maintenance of
the luminal-specific cistrome in breast cancer cells.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1315445111 
PMCID: PMC3977241
PMID: 24639548  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 14;9(3):e91884. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0091884. eCollection
2014.

A microRNA signature associated with early recurrence in breast cancer.

Pérez-Rivas LG(1), Jerez JM(2), Carmona R(3), de Luque V(1), Vicioso L(4), Claros
MG(5), Viguera E(6), Pajares B(1), Sánchez A(1), Ribelles N(1), Alba E(1), Lozano
J(7).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Oncología Molecular, Servicio de Oncología Médica, Instituto de
Biomedicina de Málaga (IBIMA), Hospital Universitario Virgen de la Victoria,
Málaga, Spain. (2)Departamento de Lenguajes y Ciencias de la Computación,
Universidad de Málaga, Málaga, Spain. (3)Plataforma Andaluza de Bioinformática,
Universidad de Málaga, Málaga, Spain. (4)Servicio de Anatomía Patológica,
Instituto de Biomedicina de Málaga (IBIMA), Hospital Universitario Virgen de la
Victoria, Málaga, Spain. (5)Plataforma Andaluza de Bioinformática, Universidad de
Málaga, Málaga, Spain; Departmento de Biología Molecular y Bioquímica,
Universidad de Málaga, Málaga, Spain. (6)Departmento of Biología Celular,
Genética y Fisiología Animal, Universidad de Málaga, Málaga, Spain.
(7)Laboratorio de Oncología Molecular, Servicio de Oncología Médica, Instituto de
Biomedicina de Málaga (IBIMA), Hospital Universitario Virgen de la Victoria,
Málaga, Spain; Departmento de Biología Molecular y Bioquímica, Universidad de
Málaga, Málaga, Spain.

Recurrent breast cancer occurring after the initial treatment is associated with 
poor outcome. A bimodal relapse pattern after surgery for primary tumor has been 
described with peaks of early and late recurrence occurring at about 2 and 5
years, respectively. Although several clinical and pathological features have
been used to discriminate between low- and high-risk patients, the identification
of molecular biomarkers with prognostic value remains an unmet need in the
current management of breast cancer. Using microarray-based technology, we have
performed a microRNA expression analysis in 71 primary breast tumors from
patients that either remained disease-free at 5 years post-surgery (group A) or
developed early (group B) or late (group C) recurrence. Unsupervised hierarchical
clustering of microRNA expression data segregated tumors in two groups, mainly
corresponding to patients with early recurrence and those with no recurrence.
Microarray data analysis and RT-qPCR validation led to the identification of a
set of 5 microRNAs (the 5-miRNA signature) differentially expressed between these
two groups: miR-149, miR-10a, miR-20b, miR-30a-3p and miR-342-5p. All five
microRNAs were down-regulated in tumors from patients with early recurrence. We
show here that the 5-miRNA signature defines a high-risk group of patients with
shorter relapse-free survival and has predictive value to discriminate
non-relapsing versus early-relapsing patients (AUC = 0.993, p-value<0.05).
Network analysis based on miRNA-target interactions curated by public databases
suggests that down-regulation of the 5-miRNA signature in the subset of
early-relapsing tumors would result in an overall increased proliferative and
angiogenic capacity. In summary, we have identified a set of recurrence-related
microRNAs with potential prognostic value to identify patients who will likely
develop metastasis early after primary breast surgery.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0091884 
PMCID: PMC3954835
PMID: 24632820  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2014 Apr;144(3):561-8. doi: 10.1007/s10549-014-2904-z.
Epub 2014 Mar 12.

Combined analysis of gene expression, DNA copy number, and mutation profiling
data to display biological process anomalies in individual breast cancers.

Shi W(1), Balazs B, Györffy B, Jiang T, Symmans WF, Hatzis C, Pusztai L.

Author information: 
(1)Yale Cancer Center, Yale School of Medicine, Yale University, 333 Cedar St, PO
Box 208032, New Haven, CT, 06520, USA.

The goal of this analysis was to develop a computational tool that integrates the
totality of gene expression, DNA copy number, and sequence abnormalities in
individual cancers in the framework of biological processes. We used the
hierarchical structure of the gene ontology (GO) database to create a reference
network and projected mRNA expression, DNA copy number and mutation anomalies
detected in single samples into this space. We applied our method to 59 breast
cancers where all three types of molecular data were available. Each cancer had a
large number of disturbed biological processes. Locomotion, multicellular
organismal process, and signal transduction pathways were the most commonly
affected GO terms, but the individual molecular events were different from
case-to-case. Estrogen receptor-positive and -negative cancers had different
repertoire of anomalies. We tested the functional impact of 27 mRNAs that had
overexpression in cancer with variable frequency (<2-42 %) using an siRNA screen.
Each of these genes inhibited cell growth in at least some of 18 breast cancer
cell lines. We developed a free, on-line software tool ( http://netgoplot.org )
to display the complex genomic abnormalities in individual cancers in the
biological framework of the GO biological processes. Each cancer harbored a
variable number of pathway anomalies and the individual molecular events that
caused an anomaly varied from case-to-case. Our in vitro experiments indicate
that rare case-specific molecular abnormalities can play a functional role and
driver events may vary from case-to-case depending on the constellation of other 
molecular anomalies.

DOI: 10.1007/s10549-014-2904-z 
PMID: 24619174  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 10;9(3):e91894. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0091894. eCollection
2014.

A systematic in silico mining of the mechanistic implications and therapeutic
potentials of estrogen receptor (ER)-α in breast cancer.

Li X(1), Sun R(1), Chen W(1), Lu B(1), Li X(1), Wang Z(1), Bao J(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences and Key Laboratory of Bio-Resources and
Eco-Environment, Ministry of Education, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China.

Estrogen receptor (ER)-α has long been a potential target in ER-α-positive breast
cancer therapeutics. In this study, we integrated ER-α-related bioinformatic data
at different levels to systematically explore the mechanistic and therapeutic
implications of ER-α. Firstly, we identified ER-α-interacting proteins and target
genes of ER-α-regulating microRNAs (miRNAs), and analyzed their functional gene
ontology (GO) annotations of those ER-α-associated proteins. In addition, we
predicted ten consensus miRNAs that could target ER-α, and screened candidate
traditional Chinese medicine (TCM) compounds that might hit diverse conformations
of ER-α ligand binding domain (LBD). These findings may help to uncover the
mechanistic implications of ER-α in breast cancer at a systematic level, and
provide clues of miRNAs- and small molecule modulators- based strategies for
future ER-α-positive breast cancer therapeutics.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0091894 
PMCID: PMC3948898
PMID: 24614816  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 5;9(3):e90642. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0090642. eCollection 
2014.

Prognostic value of gene signatures and proliferation in lymph-node-negative
breast cancer.

Jonsdottir K(1), Assmus J(2), Slewa A(1), Gudlaugsson E(1), Skaland I(1), Baak
JP(3), Janssen EA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Stavanger University Hospital, Stavanger, Norway.
(2)Centre for Clinical Research, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway.
(3)Department of Pathology, Stavanger University Hospital, Stavanger, Norway;
Free University, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

INTRODUCTION: The overall survival rate is good for lymph-node-negative breast
cancer patients, but they still suffer from serious over- and some
undertreatments. Prognostic and predictive gene signatures for node-negative
breast cancer have a high number of genes related to proliferation. The
prognostic value of gene sets from commercial gene-expression assays were
compared with proliferation markers.
METHODS: Illumina WG6 mRNA microarray analysis was used to examine 94
fresh-frozen tumour samples from node-negative breast cancer patients. The
patients were divided into low- and high-risk groups for distant metastasis based
on the MammaPrint-related genes, and into low-, intermediate- and high-risk
groups based on the recurrence score algorithm with genes included in Oncotype
DX. These data were then compared to proliferation status, as measured by the
mitotic activity index, the expressions of phosphohistone H3 (PPH3), and Ki67.
RESULTS: Kaplan-Meier survival analysis for distant-metastasis-free survival
revealed that patients with weak and strong PPH3 expressions had 14-year survival
rates of 87% (n=45), and 65% (n=49, p=0.014), respectively. Analysis of the
MammaPrint classification resulted in 14-year survival rates of 80% (n=45) and
71% (n=49, p=0.287) for patients with low and high risks of recurrence,
respectively. The Oncotype DX categorization yielded 14-year survival rates of
83% (n=18), 79% (n=42) and 68% (n=34) for those in the low-, intermediate- and
high-risk groups, respectively (p=0.52). Supervised hierarchical cluster analysis
for distant-metastasis-free survival in the subgroup of patients with strong PPH3
expression revealed that the genes involved in Notch signalling and cell adhesion
were expressed at higher levels in those patients with distant metastasis.
CONCLUSION: This pilot study indicates that proliferation has greater prognostic 
value than the expressions of either MammaPrint- or Oncotype-DX-related genes.
Furthermore, in the subgroup of patients with high proliferation, Notch
signalling pathway genes appear to be expressed at higher levels in patients who 
develop distant metastasis.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0090642 
PMCID: PMC3944091
PMID: 24599057  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Front Genet. 2014 Feb 3;5:15. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2014.00015. eCollection 2014.

The gene regulatory network for breast cancer: integrated regulatory landscape of
cancer hallmarks.

Emmert-Streib F(1), de Matos Simoes R(1), Mullan P(2), Haibe-Kains B(3), Dehmer
M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Computational Biology and Machine Learning Laboratory, Faculty of Medicine,
Health and Life Sciences, Center for Cancer Research and Cell Biology, School of 
Medicine, Dentistry and Biomedical Sciences, Queen's University Belfast Belfast, 
UK. (2)Faculty of Medicine, Health and Life Sciences, Center for Cancer Research 
and Cell Biology, School of Medicine, Dentistry and Biomedical Sciences, Queen's 
University Belfast Belfast, UK. (3)Bioinformatics and Computational Genomics
Laboratory, Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, University Health Network Toronto,
Ontario, Canada. (4)Institute for Bioinformatics and Translational Research,
UMIT, Eduard Wallnoefer Zentrum 1 Hall in Tyrol, Austria.

In this study, we infer the breast cancer gene regulatory network from gene
expression data. This network is obtained from the application of the BC3Net
inference algorithm to a large-scale gene expression data set consisting of 351
patient samples. In order to elucidate the functional relevance of the inferred
network, we are performing a Gene Ontology (GO) analysis for its structural
components. Our analysis reveals that most significant GO-terms we find for the
breast cancer network represent functional modules of biological processes that
are described by known cancer hallmarks, including translation, immune response, 
cell cycle, organelle fission, mitosis, cell adhesion, RNA processing, RNA
splicing and response to wounding. Furthermore, by using a curated list of census
cancer genes, we find an enrichment in these functional modules. Finally, we
study cooperative effects of chromosomes based on information of interacting
genes in the beast cancer network. We find that chromosome 21 is most coactive
with other chromosomes. To our knowledge this is the first study investigating
the genome-scale breast cancer network.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2014.00015 
PMCID: PMC3909882
PMID: 24550935 


1. BMC Genomics. 2014 Feb 5;15:100. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-100.

Exploration of microRNAs in porcine milk exosomes.

Chen T, Xi QY, Ye RS, Cheng X, Qi QE, Wang SB, Shu G, Wang LN, Zhu XT, Jiang QY, 
Zhang YL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Guandong Provincial Key Lab of Agro-Animal Genomics And Molecular Breeding,
College of Animal Science, ALLTECH-SCAU Animal Nutrition Control Research
Alliance, National Engineering Research Center For Breeding Swine Industry, South
China Agricultural University, Guangzhou 510642, China. Zhangyl@scau.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Breast milk contains complex nutrients and facilitates the maturation
of various biological systems in infants. Exosomes, membranous vesicles of
endocytic origin found in different body fluids such as milk, can mediate
intercellular communication. We hypothesized that microRNAs (miRNAs), a class of 
non-coding small RNAs of 18-25 nt which are known to be packaged in exosomes of
human, bovine and porcine milk, may play important roles in the development of
piglets.
RESULTS: In this study, exosomes of approximately 100 nm in diameter were
isolated from porcine milk through serial centrifugation and ultracentrifugation 
procedures. Total RNA was extracted from exosomes, and 5S ribosomal RNA was found
to be the major RNA component. Solexa sequencing showed a total of 491 miRNAs,
including 176 known miRNAs and 315 novel mature miRNAs (representing 366
pre-miRNAs), which were distributed among 30 clusters and 35 families, and two
predicted novel miRNAs were verified targeting 3'UTR of IGF-1R by luciferase
assay. Interestingly, we observed that three miRNAs (ssc-let-7e, ssc-miR-27a, and
ssc-miR-30a) could be generated from miRNA-offset RNAs (moRNAs). The top 10
miRNAs accounted for 74.5% (67,154 counts) of total counts, which were predicted 
to target 2,333 genes by RNAhybrid software. Gene Ontology and Kyoto Encyclopedia
of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway analyses using DAVID bioinformatics resources
indicated that the identified miRNAs targeted genes enriched in transcription,
immunity and metabolism processes, and 14 of the top 20 miRNAs possibly
participate in regulation of the IgA immune network.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that porcine milk exosomes contain a large
number of miRNAs, which potentially play an important role in information
transfer from sow milk to piglets. The predicted miRNAs of porcine milk exosomes 
in this study provide a basis for future biochemical and biophysical function
studies.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-100 
PMCID: PMC4008308
PMID: 24499489  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Tumour Biol. 2014 May;35(5):4779-84. doi: 10.1007/s13277-014-1627-4. Epub 2014
Jan 28.

ChIP-seq predicted estrogen receptor biding sites in human breast cancer cell
line MCF7.

Li Q(1), Wang H, Yu L, Zhou J, Chen J, Zhang X, Chen L, Gao Y, Li Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, East Hospital, Tongji University School of Medicine,
Shanghai, 200120, China.

The aim of this study was to find estrogen receptor (ER) binding sites of
estradiol (E2)-treated and control groups and discuss the roles of ER activation 
in the tumorigenesis and progression of various human cancers. The ER ChIP-seq
data GSE19013 was downloaded from Gene Expression Omnibus database, including
E2-treated data GSM470419 and control data GSM470418. MACS software was utilized 
to identify ER binding sites in two groups. R's ChIPpeakAnno was used to detect
ER-regulated target genes. Motif finding was employed to analyze ER concordant
transcription factors (TFs) in MCF7 cell. The Gene Ontology (GO) was used to
conduct functional enrichment analysis. We identified 9,134 ER binding sites in
E2 stimulation group and 1,969 in control group. GO enrichment analysis of target
genes showed that ER-regulated target genes mainly participated in mRNA catabolic
process, protein complex disassembly, and protein localization to
organelle-related biology process; while in E2 stimulation group, the function of
ER-regulated target genes sharply changed. The effect of E2 in MCF7 cell
suggested that activated ER probably reacted with several TFs and then
co-regulated related genes expression. Furthermore, several TFs, such as PAX6,
SMAD3, and ESR2, had multiply cellular regulation function. Our results showed
that E2 stimulates breast cancer cell growth through ER. This may infer the
function of ER in occurrence and development of breast cancer. Together, our
study would pave ways for discussing ER concordant TFs and studying other
ER-recruited TFs.

DOI: 10.1007/s13277-014-1627-4 
PMID: 24470138  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Methods. 2014 Jun 1;67(3):394-406. doi: 10.1016/j.ymeth.2014.01.007. Epub 2014
Jan 15.

Induction of apoptosis through ER stress and TP53 in MCF-7 cells by the
nanoparticle [Gd@C82(OH)22]n: A systems biology study.

Wang L(1), Meng J(2), Cao W(3), Li Q(1), Qiu Y(1), Sun B(4), Li LM(5).

Author information: 
(1)NCMIS, Academy of Mathematics and Systems Science, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Beijing 100190, China. (2)CAS Key Laboratory for Biomedical Effects of 
Nanomaterials and Nanosafety, National Center for Nanoscience and Technology of
China, Beijing 100190, China. Electronic address: mengj@nanoctr.cn. (3)CAS Key
Laboratory for Biomedical Effects of Nanomaterials and Nanosafety, National
Center for Nanoscience and Technology of China, Beijing 100190, China. (4)CAS Key
Laboratory for Biomedical Effects of Nanomaterials and Nanosafety and Key
Laboratory for Nuclear Techniques, Institute of High Energy Physics, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China. (5)NCMIS, Academy of Mathematics and 
Systems Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China. Electronic
address: lilei@amss.ac.cn.

The nanoparticle gadolinium endohedral metallofullerenol [Gd@C82(OH)22]n is a new
candidate for cancer treatment with low toxicity. However, its anti-cancer
mechanisms remain mostly unknown. In this study, we took a systems biology view
of the gene expression profiles of human breast cancer cells (MCF-7) and human
umbilical vein endothelial cells (ECV304) treated with and without
[Gd@C82(OH)22]n, respectively, measured by the Agilent Gene Chip G4112F. To
properly analyze these data, we modified a suit of statistical methods we
developed. For the first time we applied the sub-sub normalization to Agilent
two-color microarrays. Instead of a simple linear regression, we proposed to use 
a one-knot SPLINE model in the sub-sub normalization to account for nonlinear
spatial effects. The parameters estimated by least trimmed squares- and
S-estimators show similar normalization results. We made several kinds of
inferences by integrating the expression profiles with the bioinformatic
knowledge in KEGG pathways, Gene Ontology, JASPAR, and TRANSFAC. In the
transcriptional inference, we proposed the BASE2.0 method to infer a
transcription factor's up-regulation and down-regulation activities separately.
Overall, [Gd@C82(OH)22]n induces more differentiation in MCF-7 cells than in
ECV304 cells, particularly in the reduction of protein processing such as protein
glucosylation, folding, targeting, exporting, and transporting. Among the KEGG
pathways, the ErbB signaling pathway is up-regulated, whereas protein processing 
in endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is down-regulated. CHOP, a key pro-apoptotic gene
downstream of the ER stress pathway, increases to nine folds in MCF-7 cells after
treatment. These findings indicate that ER stress may be one important factor
that induces apoptosis in MCF-7 cells after [Gd@C82(OH)22]n treatment. The
expression profiles of genes associated with ER stress and apoptosis are
statistically consistent with other profiles reported in the literature, such as 
those of HEK293T and MCF-7 cells induced by the miR-23a∼27a∼24-2 cluster.
Furthermore, one of the inferred regulatory mechanisms comprises the apoptosis
network centered around TP53, whose effective regulation of apoptosis is somehow 
reestablished after [Gd@C82(OH)22]n treatment. These results elucidate the
application and development of [Gd@C82(OH)22]n and other fullerene derivates.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymeth.2014.01.007 
PMID: 24440483  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. J Theor Biol. 2014 Dec 7;362:75-82. doi: 10.1016/j.jtbi.2014.01.005. Epub 2014
Jan 15.

A co-expression modules based gene selection for cancer recognition.

Lu X(1), Deng Y(2), Huang L(2), Feng B(2), Liao B(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Information Science and Engineering, Hunan University, Changsha
410082, China; College of Mechatronics and Automation, National University of
Defense Technology, Changsha 410073, China. Electronic address:
hnluxinguo@hnu.edu.cn. (2)School of Information Science and Engineering, Hunan
University, Changsha 410082, China.

Gene expression profiles are used to recognize patient samples for cancer
diagnosis and therapy. Gene selection is crucial to high recognition performance.
In usual gene selection methods the genes are considered as independent
individuals and the correlation among genes is not used efficiently. In this
description, a co-expression modules based gene selection method for cancer
recognition is proposed. First, in the cancer dataset a weighted correlation
network is constructed according to the correlation between each pair of genes,
different modules from this network are identified and the significant modules
are selected for following exploration. Second, based on these informative
modules information gain is applied to selecting the feature genes for cancer
recognition. Then using LOOCV, the experiments with different classification
algorithms are conducted and the results show that the proposed method makes
better classification accuracy than traditional gene selection methods. At last, 
via gene ontology enrichment analysis the biological significance of the
co-expressed genes in specific modules was verified.

Crown Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jtbi.2014.01.005 
PMID: 24440175  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Int J Mol Med. 2014 Jan;33(1):8-16. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2013.1563. Epub 2013 Nov
21.

Thymoquinone regulates gene expression levels in the estrogen metabolic and
interferon pathways in MCF7 breast cancer cells.

Motaghed M(1), Al-Hassan FM, Hamid SS.

Author information: 
(1)Oncology and Radiological Science Cluster, Advanced Medical and Dental
Institute, Universiti Sains Malaysia, Kepala Batas, Penang 13200, Malaysia.

New drugs are continuously being developed for the treatment of patients with
estrogen receptor-positive breast cancer. Thymoquinone is one of the drugs that
exhibits anticancer characteristics based on in vivo and in vitro models. This
study further investigates the effects of thymoquinone on human gene expression
using cDNA microarray technology. The quantification of RNA samples was carried
out using an Agilent 2100 Bioanalyser to determine the RNA integrity number
(RIN). The Agilent Low Input Quick Amplification Labelling kit was used to
generate cRNA in two-color microarray analysis. Samples with RIN >9.0 were used
in this study. The universal human reference RNA was used as the common
reference. The samples were labelled with cyanine-3 (cye-3) CTP dye and the
universal human reference was labelled with cyanine-5 (cye-5) CTP dye. cRNA was
purified with the RNeasy Plus Mini kit and quantified using a NanoDrop 2000c
spectrophotometer. The arrays were scanned data analysed using Feature Extraction
and GeneSpring software. Two-step qRT-PCR was selected to determine the relative 
gene expression using the High Capacity RNA-to-cDNA kit. The results from Gene
Ontology (GO) analysis, indicated that 8 GO terms were related to biological
processes (84%) and molecular functions (16%). A total of 577 entities showed
>2-fold change in expression. Of these entities, 45.2% showed an upregulation and
54.7% showed a downregulation in expression. The interpretation of single
experiment analysis (SEA) revealed that the cytochrome P450, family 1, subfamily 
A, polypeptide 1 (CYP1A1) and UDP glucuronosyltransferase 1 family, polypeptide
A8 (UGT1A8) genes in the estrogen metabolic pathway were downregulated
significantly by 43- and 11‑fold, respectively. The solute carrier family 7
(anionic amino acid transporter light chain, xc-system), member 11 (SLC7A11) gene
in the interferon pathway, reported to be involved in the development of
chemoresistance, was downregulated by 15‑fold. The interferon-induced protein
with tetratricopeptide repeats (IFIT)1, IFIT2, IFIT3, interferon, α-inducible
protein (IFI)6 (also known as G1P3), interferon regulatory factor 9 (IRF9,
ISGF3), 2'-5'-oligoadenylate synthetase 1, 40/46 kDa (OAS1) and signal transducer
and activator of transcription 1 (STAT1) genes all showed changes in expression
following treatment with thymoquinone. The caspase 10, apoptosis-related cysteine
peptidase (CASP10) gene was activated and the protein tyrosine phosphatase,
receptor type, R (PTPRR) and myocyte enhancer factor 2C (MEF2C) genes were
upregulated in the classical MAPK and p38 MAPK pathways. These findings indicate 
that thymquinone targets specific genes in the estrogen metabolic and interferon 
pathways.

DOI: 10.3892/ijmm.2013.1563 
PMCID: PMC3868490
PMID: 24270600  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Genome. 2013 Oct;56(10):619-25. doi: 10.1139/gen-2013-0068. Epub 2013 Jul 20.

Neuregulin 1-alpha regulates phosphorylation, acetylation, and alternative
splicing in lymphoblastoid cells.

Ghahramani Seno MM(1), Gwadry FG, Hu P, Scherer SW.

Author information: 
(1)a The Centre for Applied Genomics, Program in Genetics and Genome Biology, The
Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON M5G 1L7, Canada.

Comment in
    Genome. 2013 Nov;56(11):703-4.

Neuregulins (NRGs) are signaling molecules involved in various cellular and
developmental processes. Abnormal expression and (or) genomic variations of some 
of these molecules, such as NRG1, have been associated with disease conditions
such as cancer and schizophrenia. To gain a comprehensive molecular insight into 
possible pathways/networks regulated by NRG1-alpha, we performed a global
expression profiling analysis on lymphoblastoid cell lines exposed to NRG1-alpha.
Our data show that this signaling molecule mainly regulates coordinated
expression of genes involved in three processes: phosphorylation, acetylation,
and alternative splicing. These processes have fundamental roles in proper
development and function of various tissues including the central nervous system 
(CNS)--a fact that may explain conditions associated with NRG1 dysregulations
such as schizophrenia. The data also suggest NRG1-alpha regulates genes (FBXO41) 
and miRNAs (miR-33) involved in cholesterol metabolism. Moreover, RPN2, a gene
already shown to be dysregulated in breast cancer cells, is also differentially
regulated by NRG1-alpha treatment.

DOI: 10.1139/gen-2013-0068 
PMID: 24237343  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 23;8(10):e77478. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0077478.
eCollection 2013.

Inference of gene-phenotype associations via protein-protein interaction and
orthology.

Wang P(1), Lai WF, Li MJ, Xu F, Yalamanchili HK, Lovell-Badge R, Wang J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, LKS Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong
Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China ; Shenzhen Institute of Research and Innovation, The
University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China.

One of the fundamental goals of genetics is to understand gene functions and
their associated phenotypes. To achieve this goal, in this study we developed a
computational algorithm that uses orthology and protein-protein interaction
information to infer gene-phenotype associations for multiple species.
Furthermore, we developed a web server that provides genome-wide phenotype
inference for six species: fly, human, mouse, worm, yeast, and zebrafish. We
evaluated our inference method by comparing the inferred results with known
gene-phenotype associations. The high Area Under the Curve values suggest a
significant performance of our method. By applying our method to two human
representative diseases, Type 2 Diabetes and Breast Cancer, we demonstrated that 
our method is able to identify related Gene Ontology terms and Kyoto Encyclopedia
of Genes and Genomes pathways. The web server can be used to infer functions and 
putative phenotypes of a gene along with the candidate genes of a phenotype, and 
thus aids in disease candidate gene discovery. Our web server is available at
http://jjwanglab.org/PhenoPPIOrth.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0077478 
PMCID: PMC3806783
PMID: 24194887  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Cell Signal. 2014 Jan;26(1):83-93. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2013.10.001. Epub 2013 
Oct 8.

LncRNA expression signatures of twist-induced epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition in MCF10A cells.

Hu P(1), Yang J, Hou Y, Zhang H, Zeng Z, Zhao L, Yu T, Tang X, Tu G, Cui X, Liu
M.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Laboratory Medical Diagnostics, Chinese Ministry of
Education, Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing 400016, China.

The epithelial-to-mesenchymal transient (EMT) is associated with tumor
metastasis. Twist is one of the key transcription factors for EMT and relates to 
tumor cell migration. Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) have recently emerged as
important regulatory molecules involved in a broad range of biological processes 
and complicated diseases. However, it is unknown whether a signal network and
lncRNAs are involved in Twist-induced EMT program. Taking MCF10A/Twist as a
model, more than 99 lncRNAs and 3164 genes are regulated in the Twist-induced EMT
process using lncRNA-array and cDNA micro-array. We establish a downstream signal
network associated with EMT induced by Twist using bioinformatic analysis (Gene
Ontology, pathway analysis) and experimental data. A set of multiple canonical
signal pathways (such as WNT, MAPK, JAK/STAT, TGF-β, mTOR, Hedgehog and P53
signaling pathways) and several lncRNAs [such as lncRNA (chr6, 26124411-26139312,
+), lncRNA (chr1, 41944445-41949874, -), lncRNA (chr17, 44833874-44834830, +)]
are altered in MCF10A/Twist cells. More interestingly, lncRNA (chr17,
44833874-44834830, +), lncRNA (chr17, 21142183-21156578, -), lncRNA (chr6,
26124411-26139312, +) and lncRNA (chr19, 438420-2083745, -) may be involved in
regulation or activation of WNT signaling pathway in the Twist-induced EMT
process. These findings first determine that Twist contributes to invasion and
metastasis by inducing wide-ranging transcriptional and functional changes of
lncRNAs and signal pathways in our study.

© 2013. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2013.10.001 
PMID: 24113349  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. J Proteome Res. 2014 Jan 3;13(1):212-27. doi: 10.1021/pr400773v. Epub 2013 Nov 7.

Distinct splice variants and pathway enrichment in the cell-line models of
aggressive human breast cancer subtypes.

Menon R(1), Im H, Zhang EY, Wu SL, Chen R, Snyder M, Hancock WS, Omenn GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computational Medicine & Bioinformatics, University of Michigan 
, 100 Washtenaw Avenue, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, United States.

This study was conducted as a part of the Chromosome-Centric Human Proteome
Project (C-HPP) of the Human Proteome Organization. The United States team of
C-HPP is focused on characterizing the protein-coding genes in chromosome 17.
Despite its small size, chromosome 17 is rich in protein-coding genes; it
contains many cancer-associated genes, including BRCA1, ERBB2, (Her2/neu), and
TP53. The goal of this study was to examine the splice variants expressed in
three ERBB2 expressed breast cancer cell-line models of hormone-receptor-negative
breast cancers by integrating RNA-Seq and proteomic mass spectrometry data. The
cell lines represent distinct phenotypic variations subtype: SKBR3 (ERBB2+
(overexpression)/ER-/PR-; adenocarcinoma), SUM190 (ERBB2+
(overexpression)/ER-/PR-; inflammatory breast cancer), and SUM149 (ERBB2 (low
expression) ER-/PR-; inflammatory breast cancer). We identified more than one
splice variant for 1167 genes expressed in at least one of the three cancer cell 
lines. We found multiple variants of genes that are in the signaling pathways
downstream of ERBB2 along with variants specific to one cancer cell line compared
with the other two cancer cell lines and with normal mammary cells. The overall
transcript profiles based on read counts indicated more similarities between
SKBR3 and SUM190. The top-ranking Gene Ontology and BioCarta pathways for the
cell-line specific variants pointed to distinct key mechanisms including: amino
sugar metabolism, caspase activity, and endocytosis in SKBR3; different aspects
of metabolism, especially of lipids in SUM190; cell-to-cell adhesion, integrin,
and ERK1/ERK2 signaling; and translational control in SUM149. The analyses
indicated an enrichment in the electron transport chain processes in the ERBB2
overexpressed cell line models and an association of nucleotide binding, RNA
splicing, and translation processes with the IBC models, SUM190 and SUM149.
Detailed experimental studies on the distinct variants identified from each of
these three breast cancer cell line models that may open opportunities for drug
target discovery and help unveil their specific roles in cancer progression and
metastasis.

DOI: 10.1021/pr400773v 
PMCID: PMC3943430
PMID: 24111759  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Cell Stress Chaperones. 2014 May;19(3):379-88.

Identification of signaling pathways modulated by RHBDD2 in breast cancer cells: 
a link to the unfolded protein response.

Lacunza E, Rabassa ME, Canzoneri R, Pellon-Maison M, Croce MV, Aldaz CM, Abba MC.

Rhomboid domain containing 2 (RHBDD2) was previously observed overexpressed and
amplified in breast cancer samples. In order to identify biological pathways
modulated by RHBDD2, gene expression profiles of RHBDD2 silenced breast cancer
cells were analyzed using whole genome human microarray. Among the statistically 
significant overrepresented biological processes, we found protein
metabolism—with the associated ontological terms folding , ubiquitination, and
proteosomal degradation—cell death, cell cycle, and oxidative phosphorylation. In
addition, we performed an in silico analysis searching for RHBDD2 co-expressed
genes in several human tissues. Interestingly, the functional analysis of these
genes showed similar results to those obtained with the microarray data, with
negative regulation of protein metabolism and oxidative phosphorylation as the
most enriched gene ontology terms. These data led us to hypothesize that RHBDD2
might be involved in endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress response. Thus, we
specifically analyzed the unfolding protein response (UPR) of the ER stress
process. We used a lentivirus-based approach for stable silencing of RHBDD2 mRNA 
in the T47D breast cancer cell line, and we examined the transcriptional
consequences on UPR genes as well as the phenotypic effects on migration and
proliferation processes. By employing dithiothreitol as an UPR inducer, we
observed that cells with silenced RHBDD2 showed increased expression of ATF6,
IRE1, PERK, CRT, BiP, ATF4, and CHOP (p <0.01). We also observed that RHBDD2
silencing inhibited colony formation and decreased cell migration. Based on these
studies, we hypothesize that RHBDD2 overexpression in breast cancer could
represent an adaptive phenotype to the stressful tumor microenvironment by
modulating the ER stress response.

DOI: 10.1007/s12192-013-0466-3 
PMCID: PMC3982031
PMID: 24078384  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Biomed Res Int. 2013;2013:401649. doi: 10.1155/2013/401649. Epub 2013 Sep 1.

Network-based inference framework for identifying cancer genes from gene
expression data.

Yang B(1), Zhang J, Yin Y, Zhang Y.

Author information: 
(1)School of Computer Science and Technology, Xidian University, Xi'an 710071,
China.

Great efforts have been devoted to alleviate uncertainty of detected cancer genes
as accurate identification of oncogenes is of tremendous significance and helps
unravel the biological behavior of tumors. In this paper, we present a
differential network-based framework to detect biologically meaningful
cancer-related genes. Firstly, a gene regulatory network construction algorithm
is proposed, in which a boosting regression based on likelihood score and
informative prior is employed for improving accuracy of identification. Secondly,
with the algorithm, two gene regulatory networks are constructed from case and
control samples independently. Thirdly, by subtracting the two networks, a
differential-network model is obtained and then used to rank differentially
expressed hub genes for identification of cancer biomarkers. Compared with two
existing gene-based methods (t-test and lasso), the method has a significant
improvement in accuracy both on synthetic datasets and two real breast cancer
datasets. Furthermore, identified six genes (TSPYL5, CD55, CCNE2, DCK, BBC3, and 
MUC1) susceptible to breast cancer were verified through the literature mining,
GO analysis, and pathway functional enrichment analysis. Among these oncogenes,
TSPYL5 and CCNE2 have been already known as prognostic biomarkers in breast
cancer, CD55 has been suspected of playing an important role in breast cancer
prognosis from literature evidence, and other three genes are newly discovered
breast cancer biomarkers. More generally, the differential-network schema can be 
extended to other complex diseases for detection of disease associated-genes.

DOI: 10.1155/2013/401649 
PMCID: PMC3774028
PMID: 24073403  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013 Dec;41(22):10228-40. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkt827. Epub 2013
Sep 17.

Co-regulated gene expression by oestrogen receptor α and liver receptor homolog-1
is a feature of the oestrogen response in breast cancer cells.

Lai CF(1), Flach KD, Alexi X, Fox SP, Ottaviani S, Thiruchelvam PT, Kyle FJ,
Thomas RS, Launchbury R, Hua H, Callaghan HB, Carroll JS, Charles Coombes R,
Zwart W, Buluwela L, Ali S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery and Cancer, Imperial College London, London W12 0NN, UK,
Department of Molecular Pathology, The Netherlands Cancer Institute, 1066 CX
Amsterdam, Netherlands and Cancer Research UK, Cambridge Research Institute, Li
Ka Shing Centre, Cambridge CB2 0RE, UK.

Oestrogen receptor α (ERα) is a nuclear receptor that is the driving
transcription factor expressed in the majority of breast cancers. Recent studies 
have demonstrated that the liver receptor homolog-1 (LRH-1), another nuclear
receptor, regulates breast cancer cell proliferation and promotes motility and
invasion. To determine the mechanisms of LRH-1 action in breast cancer, we
performed gene expression microarray analysis following RNA interference for
LRH-1. Interestingly, gene ontology (GO) category enrichment analysis of
LRH-1-regulated genes identified oestrogen-responsive genes as the most highly
enriched GO categories. Remarkably, chromatin immunoprecipitation coupled to
massively parallel sequencing (ChIP-seq) to identify genomic targets of LRH-1
showed LRH-1 binding at many ERα binding sites. Analysis of select binding sites 
confirmed regulation of ERα-regulated genes by LRH-1 through binding to oestrogen
response elements, as exemplified by the TFF1/pS2 gene. Finally, LRH-1
overexpression stimulated ERα recruitment, while LRH-1 knockdown reduced ERα
recruitment to ERα binding sites. Taken together, our findings establish a key
role for LRH-1 in the regulation of ERα target genes in breast cancer cells and
identify a mechanism in which co-operative binding of LRH-1 and ERα at oestrogen 
response elements controls the expression of oestrogen-responsive genes.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkt827 
PMCID: PMC3905875
PMID: 24049078  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 4;8(9):e74599. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0074599. eCollection 
2013.

Specific extracellular matrix remodeling signature of colon hepatic metastases.

Del Rio M(1), Mollevi C, Vezzio-Vie N, Bibeau F, Ychou M, Martineau P.

Author information: 
(1)IRCM, Institut de Recherche en Cancérologie de Montpellier, Montpellier,
France ; INSERM, U896, Montpellier, France ; Université Montpellier1,
Montpellier, France ; ICM, Institut régional du Cancer Montpellier, Montpellier, 
France.

To identify genes implicated in metastatic colonization of the liver in
colorectal cancer, we collected pairs of primary tumors and hepatic metastases
before chemotherapy in 13 patients. We compared mRNA expression in the pairs of
patients to identify genes deregulated during metastatic evolution. We then
validated the identified genes using data obtained by different groups. The
33-gene signature was able to classify 87% of hepatic metastases, 98% of primary 
tumors, 97% of normal colon mucosa, and 95% of normal liver tissues in six
datasets obtained using five different microarray platforms. The identified genes
are specific to colon cancer and hepatic metastases since other metastatic
locations and hepatic metastases originating from breast cancer were not
classified by the signature. Gene Ontology term analysis showed that 50% of the
genes are implicated in extracellular matrix remodeling, and more precisely in
cell adhesion, extracellular matrix organization and angiogenesis. Because of the
high efficiency of the signature to classify colon hepatic metastases, the
identified genes represent promising targets to develop new therapies that will
specifically affect hepatic metastasis microenvironment.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0074599 
PMCID: PMC3762755
PMID: 24023955  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 14;8(8):e71628. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0071628. eCollection
2013.

Novel biomarkers of arterial and venous ischemia in microvascular flaps.

Nguyen GK(1), Hwang BH, Zhang Y, Monahan JF, Davis GB, Lee YS, Ragina NP, Wang C,
Zhou ZY, Hong YK, Spivak RM, Wong AK.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Plastic & Reconstructive Surgery, Department of Surgery, Keck
School of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California,
United States of America.

The field of reconstructive microsurgery is experiencing tremendous growth, as
evidenced by recent advances in face and hand transplantation, lower limb salvage
after trauma, and breast reconstruction. Common to all of these procedures is the
creation of a nutrient vascular supply by microsurgical anastomosis between a
single artery and vein. Complications related to occluded arterial inflow and
obstructed venous outflow are not uncommon, and can result in irreversible tissue
injury, necrosis, and flap loss. At times, these complications are challenging to
clinically determine. Since early intervention with return to the operating room 
to re-establish arterial inflow or venous outflow is key to flap salvage, the
accurate diagnosis of early stage complications is essential. To date, there are 
no biochemical markers or serum assays that can predict these complications. In
this study, we utilized a rat model of flap ischemia in order to identify the
transcriptional signatures of venous congestion and arterial ischemia. We found
that the critical ischemia time for the superficial inferior epigastric
fasciocutaneus flap was four hours and therefore performed detailed analyses at
this time point. Histolgical analysis confirmed significant differences between
arterial and venous ischemia. The transcriptome of ischemic, congested, and
control flap tissues was deciphered by performing Affymetrix microarray analysis 
and verified by qRT-PCR. Principal component analysis revealed that arterial
ischemia and venous congestion were characterized by distinct transcriptomes.
Arterial ischemia and venous congestion was characterized by 408 and 1536>2-fold 
differentially expressed genes, respectively. qRT-PCR was used to identify five
candidate genes Prol1, Muc1, Fcnb, Il1b, and Vcsa1 to serve as biomarkers for
flap failure in both arterial ischemia and venous congestion. Our data suggests
that Prol1 and Vcsa1 may be specific indicators of venous congestion and allow
clinicians to both diagnose and successfully treat microvascular complications
before irreversible tissue damage and flap loss occurs.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0071628 
PMCID: PMC3743756
PMID: 23977093  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 13;8(8):e71802. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0071802. eCollection
2013.

copy number variation analysis in familial BRCA1/2-negative Finnish breast and
ovarian cancer.

Kuusisto KM(1), Akinrinade O, Vihinen M, Kankuri-Tammilehto M, Laasanen SL,
Schleutker J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical Technology/BioMediTech, University of Tampere and
Fimlab Laboratories, Tampere, Finland.

BACKGROUND: Inherited factors predisposing individuals to breast and ovarian
cancer are largely unidentified in a majority of families with hereditary breast 
and ovarian cancer (HBOC). We aimed to identify germline copy number variations
(CNVs) contributing to HBOC susceptibility in the Finnish population.
METHODS: A cohort of 84 HBOC individuals (negative for BRCA1/2-founder mutations 
and pre-screened for the most common breast cancer genes) and 36 healthy controls
were analysed with a genome-wide SNP array. CNV-affecting genes were further
studied by Gene Ontology term enrichment, pathway analyses, and database searches
to reveal genes with potential for breast and ovarian cancer predisposition. CNVs
that were considered to be important were validated and genotyped in 20
additional HBOC individuals (6 CNVs) and in additional healthy controls (5 CNVs) 
by qPCR.
RESULTS: An intronic deletion in the EPHA3 receptor tyrosine kinase was enriched 
in HBOC individuals (12 of 101, 11.9%) compared with controls (27 of 432, 6.3%)
(OR = 1.96; P = 0.055). EPHA3 was identified in several enriched molecular
functions including receptor activity. Both a novel intronic deletion in the
CSMD1 tumor suppressor gene and a homozygous intergenic deletion at 5q15 were
identified in 1 of 101 (1.0%) HBOC individuals but were very rare (1 of 436, 0.2%
and 1 of 899, 0.1%, respectively) in healthy controls suggesting that these
variants confer disease susceptibility.
CONCLUSION: This study reveals new information regarding the germline CNVs that
likely contribute to HBOC susceptibility in Finland. This information may be used
to facilitate the genetic counselling of HBOC individuals but the preliminary
results warrant additional studies of a larger study group.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0071802 
PMCID: PMC3742470
PMID: 23967248  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. PLoS One. 2013 Jun 18;8(6):e67252. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0067252. Print 2013.

Characterizing the Genetic Basis for Nicotine Induced Cancer Development: A
Transcriptome Sequencing Study.

Bavarva JH(1), Tae H, Settlage RE, Garner HR.

Author information: 
(1)Virginia Bioinformatics Institute, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, Virginia, United
States of America.

Nicotine is a known risk factor for cancer development and has been shown to
alter gene expression in cells and tissue upon exposure. We used Illumina® Next
Generation Sequencing (NGS) technology to gain unbiased biological insight into
the transcriptome of normal epithelial cells (MCF-10A) to nicotine exposure. We
generated expression data from 54,699 transcripts using triplicates of control
and nicotine stressed cells. As a result, we identified 138 differentially
expressed transcripts, including 39 uncharacterized genes. Additionally, 173
transcripts that are primarily associated with DNA replication, recombination,
and repair showed evidence for alternative splicing. We discovered the greatest
nicotine stress response by HPCAL4 (up-regulated by 4.71 fold) and NPAS3
(down-regulated by -2.73 fold); both are genes that have not been previously
implicated in nicotine exposure but are linked to cancer. We also discovered
significant down-regulation (-2.3 fold) and alternative splicing of NEAT1
(lncRNA) that may have an important, yet undiscovered regulatory role. Gene
ontology analysis revealed nicotine exposure influenced genes involved in
cellular and metabolic processes. This study reveals previously unknown
consequences of nicotine stress on the transcriptome of normal breast epithelial 
cells and provides insight into the underlying biological influence of nicotine
on normal cells, marking the foundation for future studies.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0067252 
PMCID: PMC3688980
PMID: 23825647 


1. Breast Cancer Res. 2013 Jun 20;15(3):R51. doi: 10.1186/bcr3443.

Liver × receptor ligands disrupt breast cancer cell proliferation through an
E2F-mediated mechanism.

Nguyen-Vu T, Vedin LL, Liu K, Jonsson P, Lin JZ, Candelaria NR, Candelaria LP,
Addanki S, Williams C, Gustafsson JÅ, Steffensen KR, Lin CY.

INTRODUCTION: Liver × receptors (LXRs) are members of the nuclear receptor family
of ligand-dependent transcription factors and have established functions as
regulators of cholesterol, glucose, and fatty acid metabolism and inflammatory
responses. Published reports of anti-proliferative effects of synthetic LXR
ligands on breast, prostate, ovarian, lung, skin, and colorectal cancer cells
suggest that LXRs are potential targets in cancer prevention and treatment.
METHODS: To further determine the effects of LXR ligands and identify their
potential mechanisms of action in breast cancer cells, we carried out microarray 
analysis of gene expression in four breast cancer cell lines following treatments
with the synthetic LXR ligand GW3965. Differentially expressed genes were further
subjected to gene ontology and pathway analyses, and their expression profiles
and associations with disease parameters and outcomes were examined in clinical
samples. Response of E2F target genes were validated by real-time PCR, and the
posited role of E2F2 in breast cancer cell proliferation was tested by RNA
interference experiments.
RESULTS: We observed cell line-specific transcriptional responses as well as a
set of common responsive genes. In the common responsive gene set, upregulated
genes tend to function in the known metabolic effects of LXR ligands and LXRs
whereas the downregulated genes mostly include those which function in cell cycle
regulation, DNA replication, and other cell proliferation-related processes.
Transcription factor binding site analysis of the downregulated genes revealed an
enrichment of E2F binding site sequence motifs. Correspondingly, E2F2 transcript 
levels are downregulated following LXR ligand treatment. Knockdown of E2F2
expression, similar to LXR ligand treatment, resulted in a significant disruption
of estrogen receptor positive breast cancer cell proliferation. Ligand treatment 
also decreased E2F2 binding to cis-regulatory regions of target genes.
Hierarchical clustering of breast cancer patients based on the expression
profiles of the commonly downregulated LXR ligand-responsive genes showed a
strong association of these genes with patient survival.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, these results indicate that LXR ligands target gene 
networks, including those regulated by E2F family members, are critical for tumor
biology and disease progression and merit further consideration as potential
agents in the prevention and treatment of breast cancers.

DOI: 10.1186/bcr3443 
PMCID: PMC4053202
PMID: 23809258  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. BMC Syst Biol. 2013 Jun 25;7:49. doi: 10.1186/1752-0509-7-49.

Mining breast cancer genes with a network based noise-tolerant approach.

Nie Y(1), Yu J.

Author information: 
(1)National Key Laboratory of Biochemical Engineering, Institute of Process
Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China.

BACKGROUND: Mining novel breast cancer genes is an important task in breast
cancer research. Many approaches prioritize candidate genes based on their
similarity to known cancer genes, usually by integrating multiple data sources.
However, different types of data often contain varying degrees of noise. For
effective data integration, it's important to design methods that work robustly
with respect to noise.
RESULTS: Gene Ontology (GO) annotations were often utilized in cancer gene mining
works. However, the vast majority of GO annotations were computationally derived,
thus not completely accurate. A set of genes annotated with breast cancer
enriched GO terms was adopted here as a set of source data with realistic noise. 
A novel noise tolerant approach was proposed to rank candidate breast cancer
genes using noisy source data within the framework of a comprehensive human
Protein-Protein Interaction (PPI) network. Performance of the proposed method was
quantitatively evaluated by comparing it with the more established random walk
approach. Results showed that the proposed method exhibited better performance in
ranking known breast cancer genes and higher robustness against data noise than
the random walk approach. When noise started to increase, the proposed method was
able to maintained relatively stable performance, while the random walk approach 
showed drastic performance decline; when noise increased to a large extent, the
proposed method was still able to achieve better performance than random walk
did.
CONCLUSIONS: A novel noise tolerant method was proposed to mine breast cancer
genes. Compared to the well established random walk approach, it showed better
performance in correctly ranking cancer genes and worked robustly with respect to
noise within source data. To the best of our knowledge, it's the first such
effort to quantitatively analyze noise tolerance between different breast cancer 
gene mining methods. The sorted gene list can be valuable for breast cancer
research. The proposed quantitative noise analysis method may also prove useful
for other data integration efforts. It is hoped that the current work can lead to
more discussions about influence of data noise on different computational methods
for mining disease genes.

DOI: 10.1186/1752-0509-7-49 
PMCID: PMC3702465
PMID: 23799982  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Cancer Biol Ther. 2013 Jul;14(7):658-71. doi: 10.4161/cbt.25088. Epub 2013 Jun
24.

Histone deacetylase inhibitors modulate miRNA and mRNA expression, block
metaphase, and induce apoptosis in inflammatory breast cancer cells.

Chatterjee N(1), Wang WL, Conklin T, Chittur S, Tenniswood M.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Center, Department of Biomedical Sciences, School of Public
Health, University at Albany, Rensselaer, NY, USA.

To develop new therapies for inflammatory breast cancer (IBC) we have compared
the effects of two hydroxamic acid-based histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors,
CG-1521 and Trichostatin A (TSA) on the biology of two IBC cell lines: SUM149PT
and SUM190PT. CG-1521 and TSA induce dose (0-10 µM) and time-dependent (0-96 h)
increases in the proportion of cells undergoing cell cycle arrest and apoptosis
in the presence or absence of 17β-estradiol. In SUM 149PT cells, both CG-1521 and
TSA increase the levels of acetylated α-tubulin; however the morphological
effects are different: CG-1521 blocks mitotic spindle formation and prevents
abscission during cytokinesis while TSA results in an increase in cell size. In
SUM190PT cells CG-1521 does not cause an increase in acetylated-α-tubulin and
even though TSA significantly increases the levels of acetylated tubulin, neither
inhibitor alters the morphology of the cells. Microarray analysis demonstrates
that CG-1521 modulates the expression of 876 mRNAs and 63 miRNAs in SUM149PT
cells, and 1227 mRNAs and 35 miRNAs in SUM190PT cells. Only 9% of the genes are
commonly modulated in both cell lines, suggesting that CG-1521 and TSA target
different biological processes in the two cell lines most likely though the
inhibition of different HDACs in these cell lines. Gene ontology (GO) analysis
reveals that CG-1521 affects the expression of mRNAs that encode proteins
associated with the spindle assembly checkpoint, chromosome segregation, and
microtubule-based processes in both cell lines and has cell-type specific effects
on lipid biosynthesis, response to DNA damage, and cell death.

DOI: 10.4161/cbt.25088 
PMCID: PMC3742495
PMID: 23792638  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Mol Cancer. 2013 Jun 12;12:59. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-12-59.

Global profiling of prolactin-modulated transcripts in breast cancer in vivo.

Sato T, Tran TH, Peck AR, Liu C, Ertel A, Lin J, Neilson LM, Rui H.

BACKGROUND: Prolactin (PRL) is essential for normal mammary gland development.
PRL promotes mammary tumor formation in rodents and elevated serum prolactin is
associated with increased risk of estrogen-receptor positive breast cancer in
women. On the other hand, PRL may also exert pro-differentiation effects and act 
to suppress invasive features of established breast cancer. Previously published 
limited global transcript profiling analyses of prolactin-regulated gene
expression in human breast cancer cells have exclusively been performed in vitro.
The present study aimed to shed new light on how PRL modulates estrogen receptor 
(ER)-positive breast cancer through global transcript profiling of a human breast
cancer xenograft model in vivo.
METHODS: The prolactin-responsive human T47D breast cancer cell line was
xenotransplanted into nude mice and global transcript profiling was carried out
following treatment with or without human PRL for 48 h. A subset of PRL-modulated
transcripts was further validated using qRT-PCR and immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: The in vivo analyses identified 130 PRL-modulated transcripts, 75
upregulated and 55 downregulated, based on fold change >1.6 and P-value <0.05.
From this initial panel of transcripts, a subset of 18 transcripts with
established breast cancer-relevance were selected and validated by qRT-PCR. Some 
but not all of the transcripts were also PRL-modulated in vitro. The selected
PRL-modulated transcripts were tested for dependence on Stat5, Jak1 or Jak2
activation, and for co-regulation by 17β-estradiol (E2). The protein encoded by
one of the PRL-regulated transcripts, PTHrP, was examined in a panel of 92 human 
breast cancers and found by in situ quantitative immunofluorescence analysis to
be highly positively correlated with nuclear localized and tyrosine
phosphorylated Stat5. Gene Ontology analysis revealed that PRL-upregulated genes 
were enriched in pathways involved in differentiation. Finally, a gene signature 
based on PRL-upregulated genes was associated with prolonged relapse-free and
metastasis-free survival in breast cancer patients.
CONCLUSIONS: This global analysis identified and validated a panel of
PRL-modulated transcripts in an ER-positive human breast cancer xenotransplant
model, which may have value as markers of relapse-free and metastasis-free
survival. Gene products identified in the present study may facilitate ongoing
deciphering of the pleiotropic effects of PRL on human breast cancer.

DOI: 10.1186/1476-4598-12-59 
PMCID: PMC3691730
PMID: 23758962  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2013 May 15;6(6):1112-20. Print 2013.

Determination of whole transcription profiles and specific pathways in invasive
ductal breast carcinoma.

Arnutti P(1), Kotepui M, Asanprakit W, Punyarit P, Chavalitshewinkoon-Petmitr P, 
Harnroongroj T, Petmitr S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tropical Nutrition & Food Science, Faculty of Tropical Medicine,
Mahidol University, Bangkok 10400, Thailand.

Breast cancer is the most common cancer affecting women worldwide including
Thailand. Whole transcription profiles of invasive ductal breast carcinoma (IDC) 
obtained by oligonucleotide microarray should lead to a better understanding of
the molecular basis of IDCs, allow for examination of specific markers for
diagnosis, and provide novel targets for therapy. This study aimed to detect the 
whole transcript expression of approximately 35,000 target genes in Thai breast
cancer patients, using Affymetrix GeneChip(®) Exon 1.0 Sense Target Arrays.
Analysis revealed that the differential expression profiles of 928 genes (423
up-regulated and 505 down-regulated genes) were 2-fold or greater (unpaired
t-test, p < 0.05) in invasive ductal breast cancer, compared with normal tissues.
The Gene Ontology (GO) databases support important associations in 17 gene sets
with p-value < 1E-10 and ≥ 4-fold changes, involving the tumorigenic pathways of 
cell cycles, extracellular regions, as well as cellular component organization.
Likewise, the TGFBR and IL-6 pathways contain gene expression with statistically 
significant changes in IDC.


PMCID: PMC3657364
PMID: 23696929  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Sci China Life Sci. 2013 Jun;56(6):503-12. doi: 10.1007/s11427-013-4485-1. Epub
2013 May 11.

Genome-wide identification of cancer-related polyadenylated and
non-polyadenylated RNAs in human breast and lung cell lines.

Zhao G(1), Jiao F, Liao Q, Luo H, Li H, Sun L, Bu D, Yu K, Zhao Y, Chen R.

Author information: 
(1)Bioinformatic Research Group, Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information
Processing, Advanced Computing Research Laboratory, Institute of Computing
Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China.

Eukaryotic mRNAs consist of two forms of transcripts: poly(A)+ and poly(A)-,
based on the presence or absence of poly(A) tails at the 3' end. Poly(A)+ mRNAs
are mainly protein coding mRNAs, whereas the functions of poly(A)- mRNA are
largely unknown. Previous studies have shown that a significant proportion of
gene transcripts are poly(A)- or bimorphic (containing both poly(A)+ and poly(A)-
transcripts). We compared the expression levels of poly(A)- and poly(A)+ RNA
mRNAs in normal and cancer cell lines. We also investigated the potential
functions of these RNA transcripts using an integrative workflow to explore
poly(A)+ and poly(A)- transcriptome sequences between a normal human mammary
gland cell line (HMEC) and a breast cancer cell line (MCF-7), as well as between 
a normal human lung cell line (NHLF) and a lung cancer cell line (A549). The data
showed that normal and cancer cell lines differentially express these two forms
of mRNA. Gene ontology (GO) annotation analyses hinted at the functions of these 
two groups of transcripts and grouped the differentially expressed genes
according to the form of their transcript. The data showed that cell cycle-,
apoptosis-, and cell death-related functions corresponded to most of the
differentially expressed genes in these two forms of transcripts, which were also
associated with the cancers. Furthermore, translational elongation and
translation functions were also found for the poly(A)- protein-coding genes in
cancer cell lines. We demonstrate that poly(A)- transcripts play an important
role in cancer development.

DOI: 10.1007/s11427-013-4485-1 
PMID: 23666362  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. J Theor Biol. 2013 Aug 21;331:1-11. doi: 10.1016/j.jtbi.2013.04.008. Epub 2013
Apr 22.

Prioritizing breast cancer subtype related miRNAs using miRNA-mRNA dysregulated
relationships extracted from their dual expression profiling.

Hua L(1), Zhou P, Li L, Liu H, Yang Z.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Engineering Institute of Capital Medical University, Beijing
100069, China. hualin7750@yahoo.com.cn

Identification of miRNA expression-based breast cancer subtypes is considered a
critical means of prognostication. So far, the studies on breast cancer subtypes 
have not been well characterized, and few studies have performed expression
profiling of both miRNA and mRNA from the same breast cancer subtypes samples. In
this study we analyzed dual expression profiling data of miRNA and mRNA derived
from the expression profiling of 489 miRNAs in 41 luminal-A breast tumors samples
and 15 basal-like samples. We defined a correlation coefficient ratio (CCR) and
used it to examine the correlative dysregulated relationships between miRNAs and 
mRNAs. A miRNA-mRNA dysregulated network was arisen from 6222 dysregulated
relationships, and from this network, miRNA-miRNA networks specialized for
luminal-A and basal-like breast cancer subtypes were extracted according to the
CCR values. By analyzing the networks, we found that luminal-A trend and
basal-like trend miRNA-miRNA network displayed a change in hubs which connected
the most miRNAs, and therefore become the potential breast cancer subtype related
miRNAs. In addition, we also used other network analysis methods for miRNA
expression profiling data, such as weighted correlation network analysis (WGCNA),
Bayesian network analysis, and miRNA similarity (MISIM) analysis to validate the 
identified miRNAs or miRNA clusters. This study provides a new analyzing method
to predict candidate miRNAs of breast cancer subtype from a system biology level 
and help understanding the relationship between miRNA and mRNA in primary breast 
cancer subtype.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jtbi.2013.04.008 
PMID: 23619378  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci. 2013 Mar;17(6):758-66.

Analysis of differentially expressed genes in ductal carcinoma with DNA
microarray.

Zhang BH(1), Liu J, Zhou QX, Zuo D, Wang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Key Laboratory of Regulatory Biology, Institute of Biomedical
Sciences, School of Life Sciences, East China Normal University, Shanghai, P.R.
China. bhzhang@bio.ecnu.edu.cn

AIM: The aim of this study is to investigate the dysregulated biological
functions that play important role in the occurrence and development of breast
invasive ductal carcinoma (IDC).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We downloaded the gene expression profile data from gene
expression omnibus (GEO) database, including 42 disease samples and 143 adjacent 
histological normal samples. Significance analysis of microarrays (SAM) was
employed to identify differentially expressed genes (DEGs) between the normal and
disease samples. Gene ontology (GO) function enrichment analysis was based on
Software DAVID, followed by KEGG pathway enrichment analysis. TRANSFAC database
and HPRD database were employed to construct the transcriptional regulatory
network (Tnet) and protein-protein interaction (PPI) network, respectively.
RESULTS: We got a total of 1769 genes significantly differentially expressed,
including 907 up-regulated genes and 862 down-regulated genes. Functional
analysis revealed that hormone-responsive genes are related with the occurrence
of cancer. Then, we successfully constructed IDC-specific Tnet and PPI network
with DEGs response to hormone and obtained some hub genes, such as FOS and
PIK3R1, in these networks. Besides, ten modules were found in these networks.
CONCLUSIONS: Hormone-responsive genes and modules may play an important role in
the occurrence and development of IDC. Based on the findings above, we got a
preliminary understand of the occurrence, development and metastasis of the IDC
and possibly provided effective information on the biogenesis of IDC.


PMID: 23609359  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. PLoS One. 2013;8(4):e60321. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0060321. Epub 2013 Apr 5.

Biological characteristics and genetic heterogeneity between carcinoma-associated
fibroblasts and their paired normal fibroblasts in human breast cancer.

Peng Q(1), Zhao L, Hou Y, Sun Y, Wang L, Luo H, Peng H, Liu M.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Laboratory Medical Diagnostics, Chinese Ministry of
Education, Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing, China.

BACKGROUND: The extensional signals in cross-talk between stromal cells and tumor
cells generated from extracellular matrix molecules, soluble factor, and
cell-cell adhesion complexes cooperate at the extra- and intracellular level in
the tumor microenvironment. CAFs are the primary type of stromal cells in the
tumor microenvironment and play a pivotal role in tumorigenesis and development. 
Hitherto, there is hardly any systematic analysis of the intrinsic relationship
between CAFs function and its abnormal signaling pathway. The extreme complexity 
of CAFs' features and their role in tumor development are needed to be further
investigated.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We primary cultured CAFs and NFs from early
stages of breast cancer tissue and identified them using their biomarker by
immunohistochemistry for Fibronectin, α-SMA and FAP. Microarray was applied to
analyze gene expression profiles of human breast CAFs and the paired NFs. The
Up-regulated genes classified by Gene Ontology, signal pathways enriched by DAVID
pathway analysis. Abnormal signaling pathways in breast cancer CAFs are involved 
in cell cycle, cell adhesion, signal transduction and protein transport being
reported in CAFs derived from other tumors. Significantly, the altered ATM
signaling pathway, a set of cell cycle regulated signaling, and immune associated
signaling are identified to be changed in CAFs.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: CAFs have the vigorous ability of proliferation and
potential of invasion and migration comparing with NFs. CAFs could promote breast
cancer cell invasion under co-culture conditions through up-regulated CCL18 and
CXCL12. Consistently with its biologic behavior, the gene expression profiling
analyzed by microarray shows that some of key signaling pathways, such as cell
cycle, cell adhesion, and secreting factors play an important role in CAFs. The
altered ATM signaling pathway is abnormally active in the early stage of breast
cancer. The set of immune associated signaling may be involved in tumor cell
immune evasion.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0060321 
PMCID: PMC3618271
PMID: 23577100  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Hum Mol Genet. 2013 Aug 1;22(15):3016-22. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddt158. Epub 2013 Apr 
9.

DNA co-methylation analysis suggests novel functional associations between gene
pairs in breast cancer samples.

Akulenko R(1), Helms V.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Bioinformatics, Saarland University, Saarbrücken D-66041, Germany.

Localized promoter hypermethylation and overall DNA hypomethylation have been
associated with the presence of tumor in humans. Yet, despite the large amount of
recently produced epigenetic data, there is still a lack of understanding on how 
several genes behave in tumor cells with respect to their epigenetic alterations 
such as DNA methylation. Here we performed a novel type of analysis that measures
the correlation of DNA methylation levels between two genes across many samples. 
We linked this so-called co-methylation to the genomic distance of these genes,
their functional similarity and their expression levels. Co-methylation analysis 
of more than 300 breast cancer samples from the TCGA portal yielded 187 pairs of 
genes showing Pearson correlation coefficients |r| ≥ 0.75. These pairs were
formed by 133 genes. Less than half of these pairs are located on the same
chromosome. For these, we found that the level of co-methylation is weakly
anti-correlated with genomic distance (r = -0.29). Linking co-methylation with
the functional similarity of genes showed that genes with r ≥ 0.8 tend to have
similar molecular function and to be involved in the same biological process as
described in the Gene Ontology project. Clustering of highly co-methylated genes 
identified four enriched KEGG pathways. Hence we have introduced co-methylation
as a new indicator to discover functional associations between gene pairs in
breast cancer and furthermore to discover new candidate genes that should be
inspected more closely in the context of the studied disease.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddt158 
PMID: 23571108  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Algorithms Mol Biol. 2013 Mar 23;8(1):9. doi: 10.1186/1748-7188-8-9.

Coexpression and coregulation analysis of time-series gene expression data in
estrogen-induced breast cancer cell.

Bhar A(1), Haubrock M, Mukhopadhyay A, Maulik U, Bandyopadhyay S, Wingender E.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Bioinformatics, University Medical Center Goettingen, University 
of Goettingen, Goldschmidtstrasse 1, Goettingen, D-37077, Germany.
anirban.bhar@bioinf.med.uni-goettingen.de.

BACKGROUND: Estrogen is a chemical messenger that has an influence on many breast
cancers as it helps cells to grow and divide. These cancers are often known as
estrogen responsive cancers in which estrogen receptor occupies the surface of
the cells. The successful treatment of breast cancers requires understanding gene
expression, identifying of tumor markers, acquiring knowledge of cellular
pathways, etc. In this paper we introduce our proposed triclustering algorithm
δ-TRIMAX that aims to find genes that are coexpressed over subset of samples
across a subset of time points. Here we introduce a novel mean-squared residue
for such 3D dataset. Our proposed algorithm yields triclusters that have a
mean-squared residue score below a threshold δ.
RESULTS: We have applied our algorithm on one simulated dataset and one real-life
dataset. The real-life dataset is a time-series dataset in estrogen induced
breast cancer cell line. To establish the biological significance of genes
belonging to resultant triclusters we have performed gene ontology, KEGG pathway 
and transcription factor binding site enrichment analysis. Additionally, we
represent each resultant tricluster by computing its eigengene and verify whether
its eigengene is also differentially expressed at early, middle and late estrogen
responsive stages. We also identified hub-genes for each resultant triclusters
and verified whether the hub-genes are found to be associated with breast cancer.
Through our analysis CCL2, CD47, NFIB, BRD4, HPGD, CSNK1E, NPC1L1, PTEN, PTPN2
and ADAM9 are identified as hub-genes which are already known to be associated
with breast cancer. The other genes that have also been identified as hub-genes
might be associated with breast cancer or estrogen responsive elements. The TFBS 
enrichment analysis also reveals that transcription factor POU2F1 binds to the
promoter region of ESR1 that encodes estrogen receptor α. Transcription factor
E2F1 binds to the promoter regions of coexpressed genes MCM7, ANAPC1 and WEE1.
CONCLUSIONS: Thus our integrative approach provides insights into breast cancer
prognosis.

DOI: 10.1186/1748-7188-8-9 
PMCID: PMC3827943
PMID: 23521829 


1. Cancer Prev Res (Phila). 2013 Apr;6(4):321-30. doi:
10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-12-0304. Epub 2013 Mar 19.

Lipid metabolism genes in contralateral unaffected breast and estrogen receptor
status of breast cancer.

Wang J(1), Scholtens D, Holko M, Ivancic D, Lee O, Hu H, Chatterton RT Jr,
Sullivan ME, Hansen N, Bethke K, Zalles CM, Khan SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine,
Chicago, Illinois, USA.

Risk biomarkers that are specific to estrogen receptor (ER) subtypes of breast
cancer would aid the development and implementation of distinct prevention
strategies. The contralateral unaffected breast of women with unilateral breast
cancer (cases) is a good model for defining subtype-specific risk because women
with ER-negative (ER-) index primaries are at high risk for subsequent
ER-negative primary cancers. We conducted random fine needle aspiration of the
unaffected breasts of cases. Samples from 30 subjects [15 ER-positive (ER+) and
15 ER- cases matched for age, race and menopausal status] were used for Illumina 
expression array analysis. Findings were confirmed using quantitative real-time
PCR (qRT-PCR) in the same samples. A validation set consisting of 36 subjects (12
ER+, 12 ER- and 12 standard-risk healthy controls) was used to compare gene
expression across groups. ER- case samples displayed significantly higher
expression of 18 genes/transcripts, 8 of which were associated with lipid
metabolism on gene ontology analysis (GO: 0006629). This pattern was confirmed by
qRT-PCR in the same samples, and in the 24 cases of the validation set. When
compared to the healthy controls in the validation set, significant
overexpression of 4 genes (DHRS2, HMGCS2, HPGD and ACSL3) was observed in ER-
cases, with significantly lower expression of UGT2B11 and APOD in ER+ cases, and 
decreased expression of UGT2B7 in both subtypes. These data suggest that
differential expression of lipid metabolism genes may be involved in the risk for
subtypes of breast cancer, and are potential biomarkers of ER-specific breast
cancer risk.

DOI: 10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-12-0304 
PMID: 23512947  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. BMC Bioinformatics. 2013 Mar 6;14:87. doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-14-87.

Empirical Bayes estimation of posterior probabilities of enrichment: a
comparative study of five estimators of the local false discovery rate.

Yang Z(1), Li Z, Bickel DR.

Author information: 
(1)Ottawa Institute of Systems Biology, Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology,
and Immunology, Department of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Ottawa,
451 Smyth Road, Ottawa, Ontario, K1H 8M5 Canada.

BACKGROUND: In investigating differentially expressed genes or other selected
features, researchers conduct hypothesis tests to determine which biological
categories, such as those of the Gene Ontology (GO), are enriched for the
selected features. Multiple comparison procedures (MCPs) are commonly used to
prevent excessive false positive rates. Traditional MCPs, e.g., the Bonferroni
method, go to the opposite extreme: strictly controlling a family-wise error
rate, resulting in excessive false negative rates. Researchers generally prefer
the more balanced approach of instead controlling the false discovery rate (FDR).
However, the q-values that methods of FDR control assign to biological categories
tend to be too low to reliably estimate the probability that a biological
category is not enriched for the preselected features. Thus, we study an
application of the other estimators of that probability, which is called the
local FDR (LFDR).
RESULTS: We considered five LFDR estimators for detecting enriched GO terms: a
binomial-based estimator (BBE), a maximum likelihood estimator (MLE), a
normalized MLE (NMLE), a histogram-based estimator assuming a theoretical null
hypothesis (HBE), and a histogram-based estimator assuming an empirical null
hypothesis (HBE-EN). Since NMLE depends not only on the data but also on the
specified value of π0, the proportion of non-enriched GO terms, it is only
advantageous when either π0 is already known with sufficient accuracy or there
are data for only 1 GO term. By contrast, the other estimators work without
specifying π0 but require data for at least 2 GO terms. Our simulation studies
yielded the following summaries of the relative performance of each of those four
estimators. HBE and HBE-EN produced larger biases for 2, 4, 8, 32, and 100 GO
terms than BBE and MLE. BBE has the lowest bias if π0 is 1 and if the number of
GO terms is between 2 and 32. The bias of MLE is no worse than that of BBE for
100 GO terms even when the ideal number of components in its underlying mixture
model is unknown, but has high bias when the number of GO terms is small compared
to the number of estimated parameters. For unknown values of π0, BBE has the
lowest bias for a small number of GO terms (2-32 GO terms), and MLE has the
lowest bias for a medium number of GO terms (100 GO terms).
CONCLUSIONS: For enrichment detection, we recommend estimating the LFDR by MLE
given at least a medium number of GO terms, by BBE given a small number of GO
terms, and by NMLE given either only 1 GO term or precise knowledge of π0.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2105-14-87 
PMCID: PMC3658916
PMID: 23497228  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Breast Cancer. 2014 Nov;21(6):738-47. doi: 10.1007/s12282-013-0452-8. Epub 2013
Mar 2.

Identification of a novel inhibitor of triple-negative breast cancer cell growth 
by screening of a small-molecule library.

Fujita T(1), Mizukami T, Okawara T, Inoue K, Fujimori M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Breast Surgery, Tokyo Medical University Ibaraki Medical Center,
3-20-1 Chuo, Ami Inashiki, Ibaraki, 300-0395, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Triple-negative breast cancers (TNBC) are defined as not having
amplification of the estrogen receptor, progesterone receptor, or epidermal
growth factor receptor 2. Recovery of patients is, currently, severely limited
after diagnosis of metastatic TNBC, with fewer than 30 % of patients surviving
more than 5 years. The most effective therapy to date is chemotherapy, which has 
been unsuccessful because of lack of therapeutic targets for these aggressive
cancers. To identify new molecular targets for TNBC, we have developed a novel
method for drug discovery using active compounds for identification of
pharmacodynamic biomarkers.
METHODS: We used chemical informatics to design a small-molecule library with
structural diversity. This library was used to screen for compounds that
selectively inhibit proliferation of TNBC cell lines. Different gene-expression
profiles in cell lines before and after the addition of selected compounds were
analyzed and compared with those of control cells.
RESULTS: We identified (E)-3-(3,4-dihydroxybenzylidene)benzofuran-2(3H)-one
(DBBF) which specifically inhibited proliferation of a TNBC cell line,
MDA-MB-468, with an IC50 of 2.4 μM. Microarray analysis identified several
signaling pathways, including the irinotecan pathway, which changed specifically 
in the TNBC cell lines on addition of DBBF.
CONCLUSION: We have developed a novel research strategy that involves screening
of selective inhibitors of TNBC cell line proliferation that can be used for
identification of pharmacodynamic biomarkers for TNBC. The discovery of new
pathways by this technique should lead to the identification of new therapeutic
targets for this aggressive cancer.

DOI: 10.1007/s12282-013-0452-8 
PMID: 23456737  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. PLoS One. 2013;8(2):e55635. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0055635. Epub 2013 Feb 13.

Functional-network-based gene set analysis using gene-ontology.

Chang B(1), Kustra R, Tian W.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, Institute of Biostatistics,
School of Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai, P.R. China.

To account for the functional non-equivalence among a set of genes within a
biological pathway when performing gene set analysis, we introduce GOGANPA, a
network-based gene set analysis method, which up-weights genes with functions
relevant to the gene set of interest. The genes are weighted according to its
degree within a genome-scale functional network constructed using the functional 
annotations available from the gene ontology database. By benchmarking GOGANPA
using a well-studied P53 data set and three breast cancer data sets, we will
demonstrate the power and reproducibility of our proposed method over traditional
unweighted approaches and a competing network-based approach that involves a
complex integrated network. GOGANPA's sole reliance on gene ontology further
allows GOGANPA to be widely applicable to the analysis of any
gene-ontology-annotated genome.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0055635 
PMCID: PMC3572115
PMID: 23418449  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Comput Math Methods Med. 2012;2012:568950. doi: 10.1155/2012/568950. Epub 2012
Dec 31.

Identification and functional annotation of genome-wide ER-regulated genes in
breast cancer based on ChIP-Seq data.

Ding M(1), Wang H, Chen J, Shen B, Xu Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Viral and Gene Therapy, Eastern Hepatobiliary Surgery Hospital, 
Second Military Medical University, Shanghai 200438, China.

Estrogen receptor (ER) is a crucial molecule symbol of breast cancer. Molecular
interactions between ER complexes and DNA regulate the expression of genes
responsible for cancer cell phenotypes. However, the positions and mechanisms of 
the ER binding with downstream gene targets are far from being fully understood. 
ChIP-Seq is an important assay for the genome-wide study of protein-DNA
interactions. In this paper, we explored the genome-wide chromatin localization
of ER-DNA binding regions by analyzing ChIP-Seq data from MCF-7 breast cancer
cell line. By integrating three peak detection algorithms and two datasets, we
localized 933 ER binding sites, 92% among which were located far away from
promoters, suggesting long-range control by ER. Moreover, 489 genes in the
vicinity of ER binding sites were identified as estrogen response elements by
comparison with expression data. In addition, 836 single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) in or near 157 ER-regulated genes were found in the vicinity of ER binding
sites. Furthermore, we annotated the function of the nearest-neighbor genes of
these binding sites using Gene Ontology (GO), KEGG, and GeneGo pathway databases.
The results revealed novel ER-regulated genes pathways for further experimental
validation. ER was found to affect every developed stage of breast cancer by
regulating genes related to the development, progression, and metastasis. This
study provides a deeper understanding of the regulatory mechanisms of ER and its 
associated genes.

DOI: 10.1155/2012/568950 
PMCID: PMC3546463
PMID: 23346221  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Cancer Prev Res (Phila). 2013 Feb;6(2):82-90. doi:
10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-12-0105. Epub 2013 Jan 22.

Determination of molecular markers for BRCA1 and BRCA2 heterozygosity using gene 
expression profiling.

Salmon AY(1), Salmon-Divon M, Zahavi T, Barash Y, Levy-Drummer RS, Jacob-Hirsch
J, Peretz T.

Author information: 
(1)Sharett Institute of Oncology, Hadassah Hebrew University Medical Center,
Jerusalem, Israel. asalmon@hadassah.org.il

Approximately 5% of all breast cancers can be attributed to an inherited mutation
in one of two cancer susceptibility genes, BRCA1 and BRCA2. We searched for genes
that have the potential to distinguish healthy BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation carriers 
from noncarriers based on differences in expression profiling. Using expression
microarrays, we compared gene expression of irradiated lymphocytes from BRCA1 and
BRCA2 mutation carriers versus control noncarriers. We identified 137 probe sets 
in BRCA1 carriers and 1,345 in BRCA2 carriers with differential gene expression. 
Gene Ontology analysis revealed that most of these genes relate to regulation
pathways of DNA repair processes, cell-cycle regulation, and apoptosis. Real-time
PCR was conducted on the 36 genes, which were most prominently differentially
expressed in the microarray assay; 21 genes were shown to be significantly
differentially expressed in BRCA1 and/or BRCA2 mutation carriers as compared with
controls (P < 0.05). On the basis of a validation study with 40 mutation carriers
and 17 noncarriers, a multiplex model that included six or more coincidental
genes of 18 selected genes was constructed to predict the risk of carrying a
mutation. The results using this model showed sensitivity 95% and specificity
88%. In summary, our study provides insight into the biologic effect of
heterozygous mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes in response to ionizing
irradiation-induced DNA damage. We also suggest a set of 18 genes that can serve 
as a prediction and screening tool for BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutational carriers by
using easily obtained lymphocytes.

DOI: 10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-12-0105 
PMID: 23341570  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Database (Oxford). 2013 Jan 15;2013:bas060. doi: 10.1093/database/bas060. Print
2013.

bc-GenExMiner 3.0: new mining module computes breast cancer gene expression
correlation analyses.

Jézéquel P(1), Frénel JS, Campion L, Guérin-Charbonnel C, Gouraud W, Ricolleau G,
Campone M.

Author information: 
(1)Unité Mixte de Génomique du Cancer, Hôpital Laënnec/Institut de Cancérologie
de l'Ouest - site René Gauducheau, Bd J. Monod, 44805 Nantes - Saint Herblain
Cedex, France. pascal.jezequel@ico.unicancer.fr

We recently developed a user-friendly web-based application called bc-GenExMiner 
(http://bcgenex.centregauducheau.fr), which offered the possibility to evaluate
prognostic informativity of genes in breast cancer by means of a 'prognostic
module'. In this study, we develop a new module called 'correlation module',
which includes three kinds of gene expression correlation analyses. The first one
computes correlation coefficient between 2 or more (up to 10) chosen genes. The
second one produces two lists of genes that are most correlated (positively and
negatively) to a 'tested' gene. A gene ontology (GO) mining function is also
proposed to explore GO 'biological process', 'molecular function' and 'cellular
component' terms enrichment for the output lists of most correlated genes. The
third one explores gene expression correlation between the 15 telomeric and 15
centromeric genes surrounding a 'tested' gene. These correlation analyses can be 
performed in different groups of patients: all patients (without any subtyping), 
in molecular subtypes (basal-like, HER2+, luminal A and luminal B) and according 
to oestrogen receptor status. Validation tests based on published data showed
that these automatized analyses lead to results consistent with studies'
conclusions. In brief, this new module has been developed to help basic
researchers explore molecular mechanisms of breast cancer. DATABASE URL:
http://bcgenex.centregauducheau.fr

DOI: 10.1093/database/bas060 
PMCID: PMC3548333
PMID: 23325629  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. BMC Genomics. 2012;13 Suppl 8:S20. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-13-S8-S20. Epub 2012
Dec 17.

GLAD4U: deriving and prioritizing gene lists from PubMed literature.

Jourquin J(1), Duncan D, Shi Z, Zhang B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Informatics, Vanderbilt University School of
Medicine, 400 Eskind Biomedical Library, 2209 Garland Avenue, Nashville, TN
37232, USA.

BACKGROUND: Answering questions such as "Which genes are related to breast
cancer?" usually requires retrieving relevant publications through the PubMed
search engine, reading these publications, and creating gene lists. This process 
is not only time-consuming, but also prone to errors.
RESULTS: We report GLAD4U (Gene List Automatically Derived For You), a new, free 
web-based gene retrieval and prioritization tool. GLAD4U takes advantage of
existing resources of the NCBI to ensure computational efficiency. The quality of
gene lists created by GLAD4U for three Gene Ontology (GO) terms and three disease
terms was assessed using corresponding "gold standard" lists curated in public
databases. For all queries, GLAD4U gene lists showed very high recall but low
precision, leading to low F-measure. As a comparison, EBIMed's recall was
consistently lower than GLAD4U, but its precision was higher. To present the most
relevant genes at the top of a list, we studied two prioritization methods based 
on publication count and the hypergeometric test, and compared the ranked lists
and those generated by EBIMed to the gold standards. Both GLAD4U methods
outperformed EBIMed for all queries based on a variety of quality metrics.
Moreover, the hypergeometric method allowed for a better performance by
thresholding genes with low scores. In addition, manual examination suggests that
many false-positives could be explained by the incompleteness of the gold
standards. The GLAD4U user interface accepts any valid queries for PubMed, and
its output page displays the ranked gene list and information associated with
each gene, chronologically-ordered supporting publications, along with a summary 
of the run and links for file export and functional enrichment and protein
interaction network analysis.
CONCLUSIONS: GLAD4U has a high overall recall. Although precision is generally
low, the prioritization methods successfully rank truly relevant genes at the top
of the lists to facilitate efficient browsing. GLAD4U is simple to use, and its
interface can be found at: http://bioinfo.vanderbilt.edu/glad4u.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2164-13-S8-S20 
PMCID: PMC3535723
PMID: 23282288  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Bioinformatics. 2013 Mar 1;29(5):666-8. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/bts708. Epub 
2013 Jan 6.

RamiGO: an R/Bioconductor package providing an AmiGO visualize interface.

Schröder MS(1), Gusenleitner D, Quackenbush J, Culhane AC, Haibe-Kains B.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biomolecular and Biomedical Science, Conway Institute, University
College Dublin, Belfield, Dublin 4, Ireland. markus.schroeder@ucdconnect.ie

SUMMARY: The R/Bioconductor package RamiGO is an R interface to AmiGO that
enables visualization of Gene Ontology (GO) trees. Given a list of GO terms,
RamiGO uses the AmiGO visualize API to import Graphviz-DOT format files into R,
and export these either as images (SVG, PNG) or into Cytoscape for extended
network analyses. RamiGO provides easy customization of annotation, highlighting 
of specific GO terms, colouring of terms by P-value or export of a simplified
summary GO tree. We illustrate RamiGO functionalities in a genome-wide gene set
analysis of prognostic genes in breast cancer.
AVAILABILITY AND IMPLEMENTATION: RamiGO is provided in R/Bioconductor, is open
source under the Artistic-2.0 License and is available with a user manual
containing installation, operating instructions and tutorials. It requires R
version 2.15.0 or higher. URL:
http://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/html/RamiGO.html

DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/bts708 
PMCID: PMC3582261
PMID: 23297033  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. PLoS One. 2012;7(12):e52299. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0052299. Epub 2012 Dec 20.

Cell-type specific DNA methylation patterns define human breast cellular
identity.

Novak P(1), Stampfer MR, Munoz-Rodriguez JL, Garbe JC, Ehrich M, Futscher BW,
Jensen TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Arizona Cancer Center, The University of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona, USA.
petr@umbr.cas.cz

DNA methylation plays a role in a variety of biological processes including
embryonic development, imprinting, X-chromosome inactivation, and stem cell
differentiation. Tissue specific differential methylation has also been well
characterized. We sought to extend these studies to create a map of differential 
DNA methylation between different cell types derived from a single tissue. Using 
three pairs of isogenic human mammary epithelial and fibroblast cells, promoter
region DNA methylation was characterized using MeDIP coupled to microarray
analysis. Comparison of DNA methylation between these cell types revealed nearly 
three thousand cell-type specific differentially methylated regions (ctDMRs).
MassARRAY was performed upon 87 ctDMRs to confirm and quantify differential DNA
methylation. Each of the examined regions exhibited statistically significant
differences ranging from 10-70%. Gene ontology analysis revealed the
overrepresentation of many transcription factors involved in developmental
processes. Additionally, we have shown that ctDMRs are associated with histone
related epigenetic marks and are often aberrantly methylated in breast cancer.
Overall, our data suggest that there are thousands of ctDMRs which consistently
exhibit differential DNA methylation and may underlie cell type specificity in
human breast tissue. In addition, we describe the pathways affected by these
differences and provide insight into the molecular mechanisms and physiological
overlap between normal cellular differentiation and breast carcinogenesis.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0052299 
PMCID: PMC3527522
PMID: 23284978  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Bioinformation. 2012;8(23):1132-8. doi: 10.6026/97320630081132. Epub 2012 Nov 23.

Network biology approach for identifying key regulatory genes by expression based
study of breast cancer.

Chand Y(1), Alam MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioinformatics, Karunya University, Coimbatore, India.

The use of high-throughput array technology is omnipresent in diverse areas
specifically, early diagnosis of disease, discovery of infectious agents, search 
for biological markers and screening of potential drug candidates. Here, we
integrated gene expression data with the network-based approach to identify novel
genes that were playing central role in the network through interconnecting to a 
number of differentially expressed breast cancer genes. The 62 cancerous genes
retrieved from the Breast Cancer Gene Database (BCGD) were mapped in the
normalized data accessed from Stanford Microarray Database (SMD) to analyze their
pattern. Interaction networks for each gene were constructed to understand the
biology of the metastasis at systems level. The individual networks were fused
together for the detection of interacting hubs, 38 novel genes were found to be
deeply intermingled with the central hub node. Gene Ontology studies were made to
depict the biology of the hub nodes not alone through gene ranking but by
applying the Hyper geometric test with the Benjamini Hochberg False Discovery
Rate (FDR) correction method at a significance level of 0.05. Analyzing p-values 
from the statistical test indicated that most of the novel genes were involved in
the same biological function as the disordered genes like signal transducer,
transcription regulator, enzyme binding, molecular transducer and receptor
signaling protein activity and same pathway as MAPK signaling, Apoptosis, Wnt
Signaling, ErbB signaling and Cell Cycle. Lastly, we identified 3 novel genes
CHUK, INSR and CREBBP showing high connections with the 12 novel genes reported
in literatures as well with the perturbed genes. As a result, these genes can be 
considered as significant finding in revealing the basis and pathways responsible
for breast cancer.

DOI: 10.6026/97320630081132 
PMCID: PMC3530881
PMID: 23275709 


1. Chin J Cancer. 2013 Apr;32(4):195-204. doi: 10.5732/cjc.012.10151. Epub 2012 Dec 
7.

GOMA: functional enrichment analysis tool based on GO modules.

Huang Q(1), Wu LY, Wang Y, Zhang XS.

Author information: 
(1)Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, People's Republic of China.

Analyzing the function of gene sets is a critical step in interpreting the
results of high-throughput experiments in systems biology. A variety of
enrichment analysis tools have been developed in recent years, but most output a 
long list of significantly enriched terms that are often redundant, making it
difficult to extract the most meaningful functions. In this paper, we present
GOMA, a novel enrichment analysis method based on the new concept of enriched
functional Gene Ontology (GO) modules. With this method, we systematically
revealed functional GO modules, i.e., groups of functionally similar GO terms,
via an optimization model and then ranked them by enrichment scores. Our new
method simplifies enrichment analysis results by reducing redundancy, thereby
preventing inconsistent enrichment results among functionally similar terms and
providing more biologically meaningful results.

DOI: 10.5732/cjc.012.10151 
PMCID: PMC3845568
PMID: 23237213  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Gene. 2013 Apr 10;518(1):179-86. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2012.11.034. Epub 2012 Dec
6.

Random forests-based differential analysis of gene sets for gene expression data.

Hsueh HM(1), Zhou DW, Tsai CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Statistics, National Chengchi University, Taiwan.
hsueh@nccu.edu.tw

In DNA microarray studies, gene-set analysis (GSA) has become the focus of gene
expression data analysis. GSA utilizes the gene expression profiles of
functionally related gene sets in Gene Ontology (GO) categories or priori-defined
biological classes to assess the significance of gene sets associated with
clinical outcomes or phenotypes. Many statistical approaches have been proposed
to determine whether such functionally related gene sets express differentially
(enrichment and/or deletion) in variations of phenotypes. However, little
attention has been given to the discriminatory power of gene sets and
classification of patients. In this study, we propose a method of gene set
analysis, in which gene sets are used to develop classifications of patients
based on the Random Forest (RF) algorithm. The corresponding empirical p-value of
an observed out-of-bag (OOB) error rate of the classifier is introduced to
identify differentially expressed gene sets using an adequate resampling method. 
In addition, we discuss the impacts and correlations of genes within each gene
set based on the measures of variable importance in the RF algorithm. Significant
classifications are reported and visualized together with the underlying gene
sets and their contribution to the phenotypes of interest. Numerical studies
using both synthesized data and a series of publicly available gene expression
data sets are conducted to evaluate the performance of the proposed methods.
Compared with other hypothesis testing approaches, our proposed methods are
reliable and successful in identifying enriched gene sets and in discovering the 
contributions of genes within a gene set. The classification results of
identified gene sets can provide an valuable alternative to gene set testing to
reveal the unknown, biologically relevant classes of samples or patients. In
summary, our proposed method allows one to simultaneously assess the
discriminatory ability of gene sets and the importance of genes for
interpretation of data in complex biological systems. The classifications of
biologically defined gene sets can reveal the underlying interactions of gene
sets associated with the phenotypes, and provide an insightful complement to
conventional gene set analyses.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gene.2012.11.034 
PMID: 23219997  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Biol Open. 2012 Jul 15;1(7):658-66. doi: 10.1242/bio.20121628. Epub 2012 May 25.

Effects of β4 integrin expression on microRNA patterns in breast cancer.

Gerson KD(1), Maddula VS, Seligmann BE, Shearstone JR, Khan A, Mercurio AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, University of Massachusetts Medical School , 364
Plantation Street, Worcester, MA 01605 , USA.

The integrin α6β4 is defined as an adhesion receptor for laminins. Referred to as
'β4', this integrin plays a key role in the progression of various carcinomas
through its ability to orchestrate key signal transduction events and promote
cell motility. To identify novel downstream effectors of β4 function in breast
cancer, microRNAs (miRNAs) were examined because of their extensive links to
tumorigenesis and their ability to regulate gene expression globally. Two breast 
carcinoma cell lines and a collection of invasive breast carcinomas with varying 
β4 expression were used to assess the effect of this integrin on miRNA
expression. A novel miRNA microarray analysis termed quantitative Nuclease
Protection Assay (qNPA) revealed that β4 expression can significantly alter miRNA
expression and identified two miRNA families, miR-25/32/92abc/363/363-3p/367 and 
miR-99ab/100, that are consistently downregulated by expression of this integrin.
Analysis of published Affymetrix GeneChip data identified 54 common targets of
miR-92ab and miR-99ab/100 within the subset of β4-regulated mRNAs, revealing
several genes known to be key components of β4-regulated signaling cascades and
effectors of cell motility. Gene ontology classification identified an enrichment
in genes associated with cell migration within this population. Finally, gene set
enrichment analysis of all β4-regulated mRNAs revealed an enrichment in targets
belonging to distinct miRNA families, including miR-92ab and others identified by
our initial array analyses. The results obtained in this study provide the first 
example of an integrin globally impacting miRNA expression and provide evidence
that select miRNA families collectively target genes important in executing
β4-mediated cell motility.

DOI: 10.1242/bio.20121628 
PMCID: PMC3507297
PMID: 23213459 


1. PLoS One. 2012;7(11):e48398. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0048398. Epub 2012 Nov 27.

Transcriptome profiling of peripheral blood cells identifies potential biomarkers
for doxorubicin cardiotoxicity in a rat model.

Todorova VK(1), Beggs ML, Delongchamp RR, Dhakal I, Makhoul I, Wei JY, Klimberg
VS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery/Breast Surgical Oncology, University of Arkansas for
Medical Sciences, Little Rock, AR, USA. vtodorova@uams.edu

AIMS: Doxorubicin (DOX), a widely used anticancer agent, can cause an
unpredictable cardiac toxicity which remains a major limitation in cancer
chemotherapy. There is a need for noninvasive, sensitive and specific biomarkers 
which will allow identifying patients at risk for DOX-induced cardiotoxicity to
prevent permanent cardiac damage. The aim of this study was to investigate
whether the expression of specific genes in the peripheral blood can be used as
surrogate marker(s) for DOX-induced cardiotoxicity.
METHODS/RESULTS: Rats were treated with a single dose of DOX similar to one
single dose that is often administered in humans. The cardiac and peripheral
blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) genome-wide expression profiling were examined
using Illumina microarrays. The results showed 4,409 differentially regulated
genes (DRG) in the hearts and 4,120 DRG in PBMC. Of these 2411 genes were
similarly DRG (SDRG) in both the heart and PBMC. Pathway analysis of the three
datasets of DRG using Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment analysis and Ingenuity
Pathways Analysis (IPA) showed that most of the genes in these datasets fell into
pathways related to oxidative stress response and protein ubiquination. IPA
search for potential eligible biomarkers for cardiovascular disease within the
SDRG list revealed 188 molecules.
CONCLUSIONS: We report the first in-depth comparison of DOX-induced global gene
expression profiles of hearts and PBMCs. The high similarity between the gene
expression profiles of the heart and PBMC induced by DOX indicates that the PBMC 
transcriptome may serve as a surrogate marker of DOX-induced cardiotoxicity.
Future directions of this research will include analysis of PBMC expression
profiles of cancer patients treated with DOX-based chemotherapy to identify the
cardiotoxicity risk, predict DOX-treatment response and ultimately to allow
individualized anti-cancer therapy.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0048398 
PMCID: PMC3507887
PMID: 23209553  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. PLoS One. 2012;7(11):e49401. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0049401. Epub 2012 Nov 14.

An approach for the identification of targets specific to bone metastasis using
cancer genes interactome and gene ontology analysis.

Vashisht S(1), Bagler G.

Author information: 
(1)Biotechnology Division, Institute of Himalayan Bioresource Technology, Council
of Scientific and Industrial Research, Palampur, India.

Metastasis is one of the most enigmatic aspects of cancer pathogenesis and is a
major cause of cancer-associated mortality. Secondary bone cancer (SBC) is a
complex disease caused by metastasis of tumor cells from their primary site and
is characterized by intricate interplay of molecular interactions. Identification
of targets for multifactorial diseases such as SBC, the most frequent
complication of breast and prostate cancers, is a challenge. Towards achieving
our aim of identification of targets specific to SBC, we constructed a 'Cancer
Genes Network', a representative protein interactome of cancer genes. Using graph
theoretical methods, we obtained a set of key genes that are relevant for generic
mechanisms of cancers and have a role in biological essentiality. We also
compiled a curated dataset of 391 SBC genes from published literature which
serves as a basis of ontological correlates of secondary bone cancer. Building on
these results, we implement a strategy based on generic cancer genes, SBC genes
and gene ontology enrichment method, to obtain a set of targets that are specific
to bone metastasis. Through this study, we present an approach for probing one of
the major complications in cancers, namely, metastasis. The results on genes that
play generic roles in cancer phenotype, obtained by network analysis of 'Cancer
Genes Network', have broader implications in understanding the role of molecular 
regulators in mechanisms of cancers. Specifically, our study provides a set of
potential targets that are of ontological and regulatory relevance to secondary
bone cancer.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0049401 
PMCID: PMC3498148
PMID: 23166660  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Clin Chim Acta. 2013 Jan 16;415:239-44. doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2012.11.002. Epub 2012
Nov 12.

Identification and characterization of novel microRNA candidates from deep
sequencing.

Wu Q(1), Wang C, Guo L, Ge Q, Lu Z.

Author information: 
(1)The State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Department of Hygienic
Analysis and Detection, School of Public Health, Nanjing Medical University, 140 
Hanzhong Rd, Nanjing 210029, China. wuqian@njmu.edu.cn

In our previous study, we screened a candidate new microRNA (miRNA) based on the 
deep sequencing and bioinformatics analysis. In this paper, we evaluated the
novel miRNA in the following experiment: 1) the secondary structure of the
precursor of novel-miR has the characteristic of a stem-loop hairpin structure,
and mature miRNA is far from loops and bulges. 2) we used BLAST (Basic Local
Alignment Search Tool) to compare the novel-miR sequence to that found in the
GenBank. Novel-miR sequence existed in Mus musculus, Drosophila grimshawi, Rattus
norvegicus, Xenopus laevis, Spodoptera frugiperda, Papio anubis, Salmo salar and 
so on. Then multiple sequence alignment (MSA) showed that sequence from 5 to 11
bp and 13 to 17 bp exhibited 100% similarity, where there is significant sequence
conservation. Novel-miR showed similarity in the seed region with the known
miR-3675-3p, indicating that these miRNAs are likely to belong to the same family
and thus may share common biology. 3) novel-miR from MCF-7 and MB-MDA-231 was
validated by Northern blot and detected in the serum and tissue samples of BC
patients, respectively, by real-time PCR. The data showed that novel-miR was
downregulated in the BC cancerous tissues and serum of breast cancer patients
(P<0.05). 4) transfection of novel-miR mimics into MCF-7 cell significantly
inhibited cell growth detected by CCK-8 assay (P<0.05). 5) to identify the mRNA
targets of novel-miR, we performed a computational screen for genes with
novel-miR complementary sites in their 3'-UTR using several open access
databases. In addition, we used the CapitalBio® Molecule Annotation System V3.0
to perform gene ontology (GO) analysis on the target genes of novel-miR and
specific biological process categories were enriched. 7 genes (CUL3, KRAS, ETS1, 
MNT, CNTN3, CCNK and FOXO3) which have a high prediction score and are associated
with cell proliferation, apoptosis and cell cycle were chosen. 3'-UTR luciferase 
report assay suggested that miR-BS1 negatively regulated CNTN3. In the
conclusion, novel-miR, named miR-3675b, is a true, functional and novel miRNA.
Candidate novel miRNA from deep sequencing which will be qualified as a "real"
miRNA must be validated by a series of functional experiments.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cca.2012.11.002 
PMID: 23153516  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. J Proteome Res. 2013 Jan 4;12(1):208-13. doi: 10.1021/pr300824m. Epub 2012 Nov
15.

In-depth membrane proteomic study of breast cancer tissues for the generation of 
a chromosome-based protein list.

Muraoka S(1), Kume H, Adachi J, Shiromizu T, Watanabe S, Masuda T, Ishihama Y,
Tomonaga T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Proteome Research, National Institute of Biomedical Innovation, 
Ibaraki, Osaka, Japan.

The Chromosome-centric Human Proteome Project (C-HPP) aims to define all proteins
encoded in each chromosome and especially to identify proteins that currently
lack evidence by mass spectrometry. The C-HPP also prioritizes particular protein
subsets such as membrane proteins, post-translational modifications, and
low-abundance proteins. In this study, we aimed to generate deep profiling of the
membrane proteins of human breast cancer tissues on a chromosome-by-chromosome
basis using shotgun proteomics. We identified 7092 unique proteins using membrane
fractions isolated from pooled breast cancer tissues with high confidence. A
total of 3282 proteins were annotated as membrane proteins by Gene Ontology
analysis, which covered 45% of the membrane proteins predicted in 20,859
protein-coding genes. Furthermore, we were able to identify 851 membrane proteins
that currently lack evidence by mass spectrometry in neXtProt. Our results will
contribute to the accomplishment of the primary goal of the C-HPP in identifying 
so-called "missing proteins" and generating a whole protein catalog for each
chromosome.

DOI: 10.1021/pr300824m 
PMID: 23153008  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. J Drug Target. 2013 Feb;21(2):161-74. doi: 10.3109/1061186X.2012.736998. Epub
2012 Nov 6.

Glycolytic enzymes PGK1 and PKM2 as novel transcriptional targets of PPARγ in
breast cancer pathophysiology.

Shashni B(1), Sakharkar KR, Nagasaki Y, Sakharkar MK.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Life and Environmental Sciences, University of Tsukuba,
Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.

Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor γ (PPARγ) is a nuclear receptor and
plays important roles in breast cancer cell proliferation. The complexity of the 
underlying biochemical and molecular mechanisms of breast cancer and the
involvement of PPARγ in breast cancer pathophysiology are unclear. In this study,
we carried out prediction of the peroxisome proliferator response element (PPRE) 
motifs in 2332 genes reported to be involved in breast cancer in literature. A
total of 178 genes were found to have PPRE (DR1/DR2) and/or PPAR-associated
conserved motif (PACM) motifs. We further constructed protein-protein interaction
network, disease gene network and gene ontology (GO) analyses to identify novel
key genes for experimental validation. We identified two genes in the glycolytic 
pathway (phosphoglycerate kinase 1 (PGK1) and pyruvate kinase M2 (PKM2)) at the
ATP production steps and experimentally validated their repression by PPARγ in
two breast cancer cell lines MDA-MB-231 and MCF-7. Further analysis suggested
that this repression leads to decrease in ATP levels and apoptosis. These
investigations will help us in understanding the molecular mechanisms by which
PPARγ regulates the cellular energy pathway and the use of its ligands in human
breast cancer therapeutics.

DOI: 10.3109/1061186X.2012.736998 
PMID: 23130662  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Bioinformatics. 2013 Jan 1;29(1):22-8. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/bts639. Epub
2012 Oct 26.

A hidden Markov model to identify combinatorial epigenetic regulation patterns
for estrogen receptor α target genes.

Bonneville R(1), Jin VX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Informatics, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 
43210, USA.

MOTIVATION: Many studies have shown that epigenetic changes, such as altered DNA 
methylation and histone modifications, are linked to estrogen receptor α
(ERα)-positive tumors and disease prognoses. Several recent studies have applied 
high-throughput technologies such as ChIP-seq and MBD-seq to interrogate the
altered architectures of ERα regulation in tamoxifen (Tam)-resistant breast
cancer cells. However, the details of combinatorial epigenetic regulation of ERα 
target genes in breast cancers with acquired Tam resistance have not yet been
fully examined.
RESULTS: We developed a computational approach to identify and analyze epigenetic
patterns associated with Tam resistance in the MCF7-T cell line as opposed to the
Tam-sensitive MCF7 cell line, with the goal of understanding the underlying
mechanisms of epigenetic regulatory influence on resistance to Tam treatment in
breast cancer. In this study, we used ChIP-seq of ERα, RNA polymerase II, three
histone modifications and MBD-seq data of DNA methylation in MCF7 and MCF7-T
cells to train hidden Markov models (HMMs). We applied the Bayesian information
criterion to determine that a 20-state HMM was best, which was reduced to a
14-state HMM with a Bayesian information criterion score of 1.21291 × 10(7). We
further identified four classes of biologically meaningful states in this breast 
cancer cell model system, and a set of ERα combinatorial epigenetic regulated
target genes. The correlated gene expression level and gene ontology analyses
showed that different gene ontology terms were enriched with Tam-resistant versus
sensitive breast cancer cells. Our study illustrates the applicability of
HMM-based analysis of genome-wide high-throughput genomic data to study
epigenetic influences on E2/ERα regulation in breast cancer.

DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/bts639 
PMID: 23104890  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. PLoS One. 2012;7(10):e47184. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0047184. Epub 2012 Oct 5.

TFPI alpha and beta regulate mRNAs and microRNAs involved in cancer biology and
in the immune system in breast cancer cells.

Stavik B(1), Skretting G, Olstad OK, Sletten M, Dehli Vigeland M, Sandset PM,
Iversen N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Oslo University Hospital and University of
Oslo, Oslo, Norway.

Emerging evidence indicate a new role of TFPI in cancer biology. We recently
reported that both isoforms of TFPI induced apoptosis and inhibited proliferation
of cancer cells. The signaling pathway(s) mediating the effects of TFPI is,
however, presently still unclear. Our goal was to further investigate the
cellular processes affected by TFPI and to get insight into the molecular
mechanisms involved in the effects of TFPI, using a global gene expression study 
approach. TFPIα or TFPIβ cDNA were transfected into SK-BR-3 breast cancer cells
for stable overexpression. Global mRNA and microRNA (miRNA) expressions were
measured and functional annotation of the differentially expressed genes and
miRNAs according to gene ontology terms was conducted. Selected results were
validated using qRT-PCR and Western blot. A total of 242 and 801 mRNA transcripts
and 120 and 46 miRNAs were differentially expressed in cells overexpressing TFPIα
or TFPIβ, respectively. Overexpression of either isoform significantly affected
the expression of genes involved in cell development (apoptosis, cell movement,
migration, invasion, colony formation, growth, and adhesion) and immune response.
Network analyses revealed biological interactions between these genes and implied
that several of the genes may be involved in both processes. The expression
profiles also correlated significantly with clinical phenotype and outcome.
Functional cluster analyses indicated altered activity of the epidermal growth
factor receptor, small GTPases, and the NF-κB and JAK/STAT cascades when TFPI was
overexpressed, and increased activity of the transcription factors NF-κB and
Elk-1 and phospho-Akt levels was observed. Integrated mRNA-miRNA analyses showed 
that 19% and 32% of the differentially expressed genes in cells overexpressing
TFPIα or TFPIβ, respectively, may have been regulated by miRNAs. Overexpression
of TFPI in breast cancer cells affected the expression of mRNAs and miRNAs
involved in processes facilitating cancer cell growth and immunologic response,
possibly by signal transduction involving the EGFR pathway.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0047184 
PMCID: PMC3465304
PMID: 23071754  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. BMC Med Genomics. 2012 Oct 11;5:46. doi: 10.1186/1755-8794-5-46.

Defining the genomic signature of the parous breast.

Peri S(1), de Cicco RL, Santucci-Pereira J, Slifker M, Ross EA, Russo IH, Russo
PA, Arslan AA, Belitskaya-Lévy I, Zeleniuch-Jacquotte A, Bordas P, Lenner P,
Åhman J, Afanasyeva Y, Johansson R, Sheriff F, Hallmans G, Toniolo P, Russo J.

Author information: 
(1)Breast Cancer Research Laboratory, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, PA
19111, USA.

BACKGROUND: It is accepted that a woman's lifetime risk of developing breast
cancer after menopause is reduced by early full term pregnancy and multiparity.
This phenomenon is thought to be associated with the development and
differentiation of the breast during pregnancy.
METHODS: In order to understand the underlying molecular mechanisms of pregnancy 
induced breast cancer protection, we profiled and compared the transcriptomes of 
normal breast tissue biopsies from 71 parous (P) and 42 nulliparous (NP) healthy 
postmenopausal women using Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 arrays. To
validate the results, we performed real time PCR and immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: We identified 305 differentially expressed probesets (208 distinct
genes). Of these, 267 probesets were up- and 38 down-regulated in parous breast
samples; bioinformatics analysis using gene ontology enrichment revealed that
up-regulated genes in the parous breast represented biological processes
involving differentiation and development, anchoring of epithelial cells to the
basement membrane, hemidesmosome and cell-substrate junction assembly, mRNA and
RNA metabolic processes and RNA splicing machinery. The down-regulated genes
represented biological processes that comprised cell proliferation, regulation of
IGF-like growth factor receptor signaling, somatic stem cell maintenance, muscle 
cell differentiation and apoptosis.
CONCLUSIONS: This study suggests that the differentiation of the breast imprints 
a genomic signature that is centered in the mRNA processing reactome. These
findings indicate that pregnancy may induce a safeguard mechanism at
post-transcriptional level that maintains the fidelity of the transcriptional
process.

DOI: 10.1186/1755-8794-5-46 
PMCID: PMC3487939
PMID: 23057841  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. PLoS One. 2012;7(9):e45559. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0045559. Epub 2012 Sep 19.

Decorin protein core affects the global gene expression profile of the tumor
microenvironment in a triple-negative orthotopic breast carcinoma xenograft
model.

Buraschi S(1), Neill T, Owens RT, Iniguez LA, Purkins G, Vadigepalli R, Evans B, 
Schaefer L, Peiper SC, Wang ZX, Iozzo RV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Anatomy and Cell Biology, and the Cancer Cell Biology
and Signaling Program, Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas Jefferson University,
Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Decorin, a member of the small leucine-rich proteoglycan gene family, exists and 
functions wholly within the tumor microenvironment to suppress tumorigenesis by
directly targeting and antagonizing multiple receptor tyrosine kinases, such as
the EGFR and Met. This leads to potent and sustained signal attenuation, growth
arrest, and angiostasis. We thus sought to evaluate the tumoricidal benefits of
systemic decorin on a triple-negative orthotopic breast carcinoma xenograft
model. To this end, we employed a novel high-density mixed expression array
capable of differentiating and simultaneously measuring gene signatures of both
Mus musculus (stromal) and Homo sapiens (epithelial) tissue origins. We found
that decorin protein core modulated the differential expression of 374 genes
within the stromal compartment of the tumor xenograft. Further, our top gene
ontology classes strongly suggests an unexpected and preferential role for
decorin protein core to inhibit genes necessary for immunomodulatory responses
while simultaneously inducing expression of those possessing cellular adhesion
and tumor suppressive gene properties. Rigorous verification of the top scoring
candidates led to the discovery of three genes heretofore unlinked to malignant
breast cancer that were reproducibly found to be induced in several models of
tumor stroma. Collectively, our data provide highly novel and unexpected stromal 
gene signatures as a direct function of systemic administration of decorin
protein core and reveals a fundamental basis of action for decorin to modulate
the tumor stroma as a biological mechanism for the ascribed anti-tumorigenic
properties.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0045559 
PMCID: PMC3446891
PMID: 23029096  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Cancer Biother Radiopharm. 2013 Feb;28(1):71-6. doi: 10.1089/cbr.2012.1311. Epub 
2012 Sep 25.

The bioinformatics analysis of miRNAs signatures differentially expressed in
HER2(+) versus HER2(-) breast cancers.

Nie W(1), Jin L, Wang Y, Wang Z, Guan X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Jinling Hospital, School of Medicine, Southern
Medical University, Guangzhou, PR China.

OBJECTIVE: To identify the signatures of miRNAs differentially expressed in
HER2(+) versus HER2(-) breast cancers that accurately predict the HER2 status of 
breast cancer, and to provide further insight into breast cancer therapy.
METHODS: By the methods of literature search, aberrant expressed miRNAs were
collected. By target prediction algorithm of TargetScan and PicTar and the data
enrichment analysis, target gene sets of miRNAs differentially expressed in
HER2(+) versus HER2(-) breast cancers were built. Then, using the Database for
Annotation, Visualization, and Integrated Discovery (DAVID) database, the
function modules of Gene Ontology categories and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and 
Genomes (KEGG) and BIOCARTA pathway, biological functions and signaling pathways 
that are probably regulated by miRNAs, were analyzed.
RESULTS: We got five sets of miRNAs expressed in different HER2 status of breast 
cancers finally. The five sets of data contain 22; 32; 3; 38; and 62 miRNAs,
respectively. After miRNAs target prediction and data enrichment, 5,734; 22,409; 
1,142; 22,293; and 43,460 target genes of five miRNA sets were collected. Gene
ontology analysis found these genes may be involved in transcription, protein
transport, angiogenesis, and apoptosis. Moreover, certain KEGG and BIOCARTA
signaling pathways related toHER2 status were found.
CONCLUSION: Using TargetScan and PicTar for data enrichment, and DAVID database, 
Gene Ontology categories, KEGG and BIOCARTA pathway for analysis of miRNAs
different expression, we conducted a new method for biological interpretation of 
miRNA profiling data in HER2(+) versus HER2(-) breast cancers. It may improve
understanding the regulatory roles of miRNAs in different molecular subtypes of
breast cancers. Therefore, it is beneficial to improve the accuracy of
experimental efforts to breast cancer and potential therapeutic targets.

DOI: 10.1089/cbr.2012.1311 
PMCID: PMC3545315
PMID: 23009584  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Breast Cancer Res. 2012 Sep 11;14(5):R123. doi: 10.1186/bcr3317.

High TWIST1 mRNA expression is associated with poor prognosis in lymph
node-negative and estrogen receptor-positive human breast cancer and is
co-expressed with stromal as well as ECM related genes.

Riaz M, Sieuwerts AM, Look MP, Timmermans MA, Smid M, Foekens JA, Martens JW.

INTRODUCTION: The TWIST homolog 1 (TWIST1) is a transcription factor that induces
epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT), a key process in metastasis. The
purpose of this study was to investigate whether TWIST1 expression predicts
disease progression in a large breast cancer cohort with long-term clinical
follow-up, and to reveal the biology related to TWIST1 mediated disease
progression.
METHODS: TWIST1 mRNA expression level was analyzed by quantitative real-time
reverse polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) in 1,427 primary breast cancers. In
uni- and multivariate analysis using Cox regression, TWIST1 mRNA expression level
was associated with metastasis-free survival (MFS), disease-free survival (DFS)
and overall survival (OS). Separate analyses in lymph node-negative patients
(LNN, n = 778) who did not receive adjuvant systemic therapy, before and after
stratification into estrogen receptor (ER)-positive (n = 552) and ER-negative (n 
= 226) disease, were also performed. The association of TWIST1 mRNA with survival
endpoints was assessed using Kaplan-Meier analysis. Using gene expression arrays,
genes showing a significant Spearman rank correlation with TWIST1 were used to
identify overrepresented Gene Ontology (GO) terms and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes
and Genomes (KEGG)-annotated biological pathways.
RESULTS: Increased mRNA expression level of TWIST1 analyzed as a continuous
variable in both uni- and multivariate analysis was associated with shorter MFS
in all patients (hazard ratio (HR): 1.17, 95% confidence interval, (95% CI):1.09 
to 1.26; and HR: 1.17, 95% CI: 1.08 to 1.26; respectively), in LNN patients (HR: 
1.22, 95% CI: 1.09 to 1.36; and HR: 1.21, 95% CI: 1.07 to 1.36; respectively) and
in the ER-positive subgroup of LNN patients (HR: 1.34, 95% CI: 1.17 to 1.53; and 
HR: 1.32, 95% CI: 1.14 to 1.53; respectively). Similarly, high TWIST1 expression 
was associated with shorter DFS and OS in all patients and in the LNN/ER-positive
subgroup. In contrast, no association of TWIST1 mRNA expression with MFS, DFS or 
OS was observed in ER-negative patients. Genes highly correlated with TWIST1 were
significantly enriched for cell adhesion and ECM-related signaling pathways.
Furthermore, TWIST1 mRNA was highly expressed in tumor stroma and positively
related to tumor stromal content (P <0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: TWIST1 mRNA expression is an independent prognostic factor for poor 
prognosis in LNN/ER-positive breast cancer. The biological associations suggest
an involvement of the tumor microenvironment in TWIST1's adverse role in breast
cancer.

DOI: 10.1186/bcr3317 
PMCID: PMC4053101
PMID: 22967435  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012 Sep 14;426(1):26-32. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.08.007. Epub 2012 Aug 10.

Global identification of genes regulated by estrogen signaling and demethylation 
in MCF-7 breast cancer cells.

Putnik M(1), Zhao C, Gustafsson JÅ, Dahlman-Wright K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences and Nutrition, Novum, Karolinska Institutet,
Huddinge S-14183, Sweden. milica.putnik@ki.se

Estrogen signaling and epigenetic modifications, in particular DNA methylation,
are involved in regulation of gene expression in breast cancers. Here we
investigated a potential regulatory cross-talk between these two pathways by
identifying their common target genes and exploring underlying molecular
mechanisms in human MCF-7 breast cancer cells. Gene expression profiling revealed
that the expression of approximately 140 genes was influenced by both
17β-estradiol (E2) and a demethylating agent 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (DAC). Gene
ontology (GO) analysis suggests that these genes are involved in intracellular
signaling cascades, regulation of cell proliferation and apoptosis. Based on
previously reported association with breast cancer, estrogen signaling and/or DNA
methylation, CpG island prediction and GO analysis, we selected six genes (BTG3, 
FHL2, PMAIP1, BTG2, CDKN1A and TGFB2) for further analysis. Tamoxifen reverses
the effect of E2 on the expression of all selected genes, suggesting that they
are direct targets of estrogen receptor. Furthermore, DAC treatment reactivates
the expression of all selected genes in a dose-dependent manner. Promoter CpG
island methylation status analysis revealed that only the promoters of BTG3 and
FHL2 genes are methylated, with DAC inducing demethylation, suggesting DNA
methylation directs repression of these genes in MCF-7 cells. In a further
analysis of the potential interplay between estrogen signaling and DNA
methylation, E2 treatment showed no effect on the methylation status of these
promoters. Additionally, we show that the ERα recruitment occurs at the FHL2
promoter in an E2- and DAC-independent fashion. In conclusion, we identified a
set of genes regulated by both estrogen signaling and DNA methylation. However,
our data does not support a direct molecular interplay of mediators of estrogen
and epigenetic signaling at promoters of regulated genes.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.08.007 
PMID: 22902638  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. J Pineal Res. 2013 Jan;54(1):80-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-079X.2012.01027.x. Epub
2012 Aug 1.

Genome-wide profiling in melatonin-exposed human breast cancer cell lines
identifies differentially methylated genes involved in the anticancer effect of
melatonin.

Lee SE(1), Kim SJ, Yoon HJ, Yu SY, Yang H, Jeong SI, Hwang SY, Park CS, Park YS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, School of Medicine, Kyung Hee University, Seoul,
Korea.

Epigenetic alterations have emerged as an important mechanism involved in
tumorigenesis. The epigenetic impact of DNA methylation in various types of human
cancer is not completely understood. Previously, we observed melatonin-induced
differential expression of miRNA and miRNA-related genes in human breast cancer
cell lines that indicated an anticancer effect of melatonin. In this report, we
further characterized epigenetic changes in melatonin-exposed MCF-7 cells through
the analysis of DNA methylation profiles in breast cancer cells to provide new
insights into the potential mechanisms of the anticancer effect of melatonin.
Microarray-based DNA methylation and gene expression profiling were carried out
using human breast cancer cell lines. We further identified a number of mRNAs
whose expression levels show an inverse correlation with DNA methylation levels. 
The mRNA expression levels and methylation status of candidate genes in
melatonin-exposed cells were confirmed by real-time quantitative PCR and
bisulfite PCR. This approach led to the detection of cancer-related genes, which 
were oncogenic genes, including EGR3 and POU4F2/Brn-3b were down-regulated, while
the tumor suppressor gene, GPC3, was up-regulated by 1 nm melatonin-treated MCF-7
cells. Our results provide detailed insights into the DNA methylation patterns
induced by melatonin and suggest a potential mechanism of the anticancer effect
of aberrant DNA methylation in melatonin-treated breast cancer cells.

© 2012 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-079X.2012.01027.x 
PMID: 22856590  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Proteomics. 2012 Jul;12(13):2149-57. doi: 10.1002/pmic.201100497.

Biomarker discovery using a comparative omics approach in a mouse model
developing heterogeneous mammary cancer subtypes.

Pennings JL(1), Van Dycke KC, van Oostrom CT, Kuiper RV, Rodenburg W, de Vries A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Health Protection Research (GBO), National Institute for Public
Health and the Environment (RIVM), Bilthoven, The Netherlands.
Jeroen.Pennings@rivm.nl

Identification of biomarkers for early breast cancer detection in blood is a
challenging task, since breast cancer is a heterogeneous disease with a wide
range of tumor subtypes. This is envisioned to result in differences in serum
protein levels. The p53(R270H/+) WAPCre mouse model is unique in that these mice 
spontaneously develop both ER- and ER+ tumors, in proportions comparable to
humans. Therefore, these mice provide a well-suited model system to identify
human relevant biomarkers for early breast cancer detection that are additionally
specific for different tumor subtypes. Mammary gland tumors were obtained from
p53(R270H/+) WAPCre mice and cellular origin, ER, and HER2 status were
characterized. We compared gene expression profiles for tumors with different
characteristics versus control tissue, and determined genes differentially
expressed across tumor subtypes. By using literature data (Gene Ontology,
UniProt, and Human Plasma Proteome), we further identified protein candidate
biomarkers for blood-based detection of breast cancer. Functional
overrepresentation analysis (using Gene Ontology, MSigDB, BioGPS, Cancer
GeneSigDB, and proteomics literature data) showed enrichment for several
processes relevant for human breast cancer. Finally, Human Protein Atlas data
were used to obtain a prioritized list of 16 potential biomarkers that should
facilitate further studies on blood-based breast cancer detection in humans.

© 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/pmic.201100497 
PMID: 22807454  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. J Proteome Res. 2012 Aug 3;11(8):4201-10. doi: 10.1021/pr300322q. Epub 2012 Jul
9.

Strategy for SRM-based verification of biomarker candidates discovered by iTRAQ
method in limited breast cancer tissue samples.

Muraoka S(1), Kume H, Watanabe S, Adachi J, Kuwano M, Sato M, Kawasaki N, Kodera 
Y, Ishitobi M, Inaji H, Miyamoto Y, Kato K, Tomonaga T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Proteome Research, National Institute of Biomedical Innovation, 
Ibaraki, Japan.

Since LC-MS-based quantitative proteomics has become increasingly applied to a
wide range of biological applications over the past decade, numerous studies have
performed relative and/or absolute abundance determinations across large sets of 
proteins. In this study, we discovered prognostic biomarker candidates from
limited breast cancer tissue samples using discovery-through-verification
strategy combining iTRAQ method followed by selected reaction monitoring/multiple
reaction monitoring analysis (SRM/MRM). We identified and quantified 5122
proteins with high confidence in 18 patient tissue samples (pooled high-risk
(n=9) or low-risk (n=9)). A total of 2480 proteins (48.4%) of them were annotated
as membrane proteins, 16.1% were plasma membrane and 6.6% were extracellular
space proteins by Gene Ontology analysis. Forty-nine proteins with >2-fold
differences in two groups were chosen for further analysis and verified in 16
individual tissue samples (high-risk (n=9) or low-risk (n=7)) using SRM/MRM.
Twenty-three proteins were differentially expressed among two groups of which
MFAP4 and GP2 were further confirmed by Western blotting in 17 tissue samples
(high-risk (n=9) or low-risk (n=8)) and Immunohistochemistry (IHC) in 24 tissue
samples (high-risk (n=12) or low-risk (n=12)). These results indicate that the
combination of iTRAQ and SRM/MRM proteomics will be a powerful tool for
identification and verification of candidate protein biomarkers.

DOI: 10.1021/pr300322q 
PMID: 22716024  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. BMC Genomics. 2012 May 30;13:213. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-13-213.

Identification of differentially expressed genes and pathways for intramuscular
fat deposition in pectoralis major tissues of fast-and slow-growing chickens.

Cui HX(1), Liu RR, Zhao GP, Zheng MQ, Chen JL, Wen J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Animal Sciences, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences,
Beijing 100193, People's Republic of China.

BACKGROUND: Intramuscular fat (IMF) is one of the important factors influencing
meat quality, however, for chickens, the molecular regulatory mechanisms
underlying this trait have not yet been determined. In this study, a systematic
identification of candidate genes and new pathways related to IMF deposition in
chicken breast tissue has been made using gene expression profiles of two
distinct breeds: Beijing-you (BJY), a slow-growing Chinese breed possessing high 
meat quality and Arbor Acres (AA), a commercial fast-growing broiler line.
RESULTS: Agilent cDNA microarray analyses were conducted to determine gene
expression profiles of breast muscle sampled at different developmental stages of
BJY and AA chickens. Relative to d 1 when there is no detectable IMF, breast
muscle at d 21, d 42, d 90 and d 120 (only for BJY) contained 1310 differentially
expressed genes (DEGs) in BJY and 1080 DEGs in AA. Of these, 34-70 DEGs related
to lipid metabolism or muscle development processes were examined further in each
breed based on Gene Ontology (GO) analysis. The expression of several DEGs was
correlated, positively or negatively, with the changing patterns of lipid content
or breast weight across the ages sampled, indicating that those genes may play
key roles in these developmental processes. In addition, based on KEGG pathway
analysis of DEGs in both BJY and AA chickens, it was found that in addition to
pathways affecting lipid metabolism (pathways for MAPK & PPAR signaling), cell
junction-related pathways (tight junction, ECM-receptor interaction, focal
adhesion, regulation of actin cytoskeleton), which play a prominent role in
maintaining the integrity of tissues, could contribute to the IMF deposition.
CONCLUSION: The results of this study identified potential candidate genes
associated with chicken IMF deposition and imply that IMF deposition in chicken
breast muscle is regulated and mediated not only by genes and pathways related to
lipid metabolism and muscle development, but also by others involved in cell
junctions. These findings establish the groundwork and provide new clues for
deciphering the molecular mechanisms underlying IMF deposition in poultry.
Further studies at the translational and posttranslational level are now required
to validate the genes and pathways identified here.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2164-13-213 
PMCID: PMC3420248
PMID: 22646994  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. BMC Bioinformatics. 2012 Mar 28;13 Suppl 4:S22. doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-13-S4-S22.

Improving biomarker list stability by integration of biological knowledge in the 
learning process.

Sanavia T(1), Aiolli F, Da San Martino G, Bisognin A, Di Camillo B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Information Engineering, University of Padova, via G, Gradenigo 
6/B, 35131 Padova, Italy.

BACKGROUND: The identification of robust lists of molecular biomarkers related to
a disease is a fundamental step for early diagnosis and treatment. However,
methodologies for biomarker discovery using microarray data often provide results
with limited overlap. It has been suggested that one reason for these
inconsistencies may be that in complex diseases, such as cancer, multiple genes
belonging to one or more physiological pathways are associated with the outcomes.
Thus, a possible approach to improve list stability is to integrate biological
information from genomic databases in the learning process; however, a
comprehensive assessment based on different types of biological information is
still lacking in the literature. In this work we have compared the effect of
using different biological information in the learning process like functional
annotations, protein-protein interactions and expression correlation among genes.
RESULTS: Biological knowledge has been codified by means of gene similarity
matrices and expression data linearly transformed in such a way that the more
similar two features are, the more closely they are mapped. Two semantic
similarity matrices, based on Biological Process and Molecular Function Gene
Ontology annotation, and geodesic distance applied on protein-protein interaction
networks, are the best performers in improving list stability maintaining almost 
equal prediction accuracy.
CONCLUSIONS: The performed analysis supports the idea that when some features are
strongly correlated to each other, for example because are close in the
protein-protein interaction network, then they might have similar importance and 
are equally relevant for the task at hand. Obtained results can be a starting
point for additional experiments on combining similarity matrices in order to
obtain even more stable lists of biomarkers. The implementation of the
classification algorithm is available at the link:
http://www.math.unipd.it/~dasan/biomarkers.html.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2105-13-S4-S22 
PMCID: PMC3314566
PMID: 22536969  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Int J Androl. 2012 Jun;35(3):407-14. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2605.2012.01254.x. Epub 
2012 Mar 19.

Detection of endocrine disruptors - from simple assays to whole genome scanning.

Sung E(1), Turan N, Ho PW, Ho SL, Jarratt PD, Waring RH, Ramsden DB.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biosciences, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK.

Endocrine disruptors frequently bear little structural relationship to the
hormone whose actions they disrupt. Consequently, the threat of an uninvestigated
chemical cannot easily be assessed. Here three different approaches to assessment
are discussed. The first presumes an endocrine-disrupting property, following
which a cell model capable of responding to such a hormone is used. Although
simple and cheap, it provides limited data. A second approach involves multiple
assays to detect multiple hormones. Increasing the amount of data increased the
difficulty in assessing the significance of results. To meet this problem,
cluster analysis based on a simple mathematical matrix was adopted. The matrix
was used to determine (i) a limited number of assays to identify a maximum number
of endocrine disruptors and (ii) the chemicals with the most wide-ranging
effects. A third approach was a whole genome expression analysis based on
expression of mRNAs in human TE671 medulloblastoma cells. Expression of
individual mRNAs was assessed using the Affymetrix GeneChip(®) Human Genome U133 
Plus 2.0 chip. The significance of differential expressed genes was assessed
based on gene ontology and pathways analyses using DAVID and GenMaPP programs.
The results illustrated the very wide-ranging effects of these chemicals across
the genome.

© 2012 The Authors. International Journal of Andrology © 2012 European Academy of
Andrology.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2605.2012.01254.x 
PMID: 22428665  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Clin Chim Acta. 2012 Jul 11;413(13-14):1058-65. doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2012.02.016.
Epub 2012 Feb 23.

Analysis of serum genome-wide microRNAs for breast cancer detection.

Wu Q(1), Wang C, Lu Z, Guo L, Ge Q.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Department of Hygienic Analysis
and Detection, School of Public Health, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing,
China. wuqian@njmu.edu.cn

OBJECTIVE: Among methods for profiling levels of miRNAs, next-generation
sequencing (NGS) has an effective one for genome-wide profiles, which not only
can accurately quantify known miRNAs expression, but also discovery novel miRNAs.
In this paper, we investigated that whether specific miRNAs were co-expressed in 
the serum and tissue of breast cancer (BC) patients as novel biomarkers by SOLiD 
sequencing.
METHODS: Different miRNA expression profiles of serum and tissue in breast cancer
patients and control subjects were obtained by NGS -SOLiD sequencing. Real-time
PCR was used to selected and validated candidate miRNA-biomarkers. Novel miRNAs
were predicted by computational pipeline, and validated by Northern blot
analysis.
RESULTS: Of genome-wide miRNA analysis using SOLiD sequencing, 7 miRNAs were
found to be co-upregulated (i.e., miR-103, miR-23a, miR-29a, miR-222, miR-23b,
miR-24 and miR-25). miR-222 was significantly increased in the serum of BC
patients by further validation(P<0.05), which may be a useful biomarker for
differentiating BC patients from controls with receiver operating characteristic 
(ROC) curve area 0.67 of (95% CI=0.5649 to 0.7775). A novel miRNA, named miR-BS1 
was preliminarily identified and validated. Pre-miR-BS1 has a characteristic
secondary structure. Mature miR-BS1 expression was detected in MCF-7 and
MDA-MB-231 cells. Through gene ontology analysis, predicted target genes of
miR-BS1, such as FOXO3 and KRAS, were involved in cancer-related signaling
pathway.
CONCLUSIONS: This study presented a connection between serum- and tissue- based
miRNA of breast cancer which suggested that serum-miRNAs may be potential
biomarkers for BC detection. And next-generation sequencing will provide a robust
platform for miRNA profilings.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cca.2012.02.016 
PMID: 22387599  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Radiother Oncol. 2012 Mar;102(3):436-43. doi: 10.1016/j.radonc.2012.02.002. Epub 
2012 Feb 20.

The prognostic value of temporal in vitro and in vivo derived hypoxia
gene-expression signatures in breast cancer.

Starmans MH(1), Chu KC, Haider S, Nguyen F, Seigneuric R, Magagnin MG,
Koritzinsky M, Kasprzyk A, Boutros PC, Wouters BG, Lambin P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, MaastRO, GROW-School for Oncology and
Developmental Biology, Maastricht University Medical Center, Maastricht, The
Netherlands. maud.starmans@maastrichtuniversity.nl

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Recent data suggest that in vitro and in vivo derived
hypoxia gene-expression signatures have prognostic power in breast and possibly
other cancers. However, both tumour hypoxia and the biological adaptation to this
stress are highly dynamic. Assessment of time-dependent gene-expression changes
in response to hypoxia may thus provide additional biological insights and assist
in predicting the impact of hypoxia on patient prognosis.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Transcriptome profiling was performed for three cell lines
derived from diverse tumour-types after hypoxic exposure at eight time-points,
which include a normoxic time-point. Time-dependent sets of co-regulated genes
were identified from these data. Subsequently, gene ontology (GO) and pathway
analyses were performed. The prognostic power of these novel signatures was
assessed in parallel with previous in vitro and in vivo derived hypoxia
signatures in a large breast cancer microarray meta-dataset (n=2312).
RESULTS: We identified seven recurrent temporal and two general hypoxia
signatures. GO and pathway analyses revealed regulation of both common and unique
underlying biological processes within these signatures. None of the new or
previously published in vitro signatures consisting of hypoxia-induced genes were
prognostic in the large breast cancer dataset. In contrast, signatures of
repressed genes, as well as the in vivo derived signatures of hypoxia-induced
genes showed clear prognostic power.
CONCLUSIONS: Only a subset of hypoxia-induced genes in vitro demonstrates
prognostic value when evaluated in a large clinical dataset. Despite clear
evidence of temporal patterns of gene-expression in vitro, the subset of
prognostic hypoxia regulated genes cannot be identified based on temporal pattern
alone. In vivo derived signatures appear to identify the prognostic hypoxia
induced genes. The prognostic value of hypoxia-repressed genes is likely a
surrogate for the known importance of proliferation in breast cancer outcome.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.radonc.2012.02.002 
PMID: 22356756  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. BMC Bioinformatics. 2011 Dec 16;12:478. doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-12-478.

Survival models with preclustered gene groups as covariates.

Kammers K(1), Lang M, Hengstler JG, Schmidt M, Rahnenführer J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Statistics, TU Dortmund University, Dortmund, Germany.
kammers@statistik.tu-dortmund.de

BACKGROUND: An important application of high dimensional gene expression
measurements is the risk prediction and the interpretation of the variables in
the resulting survival models. A major problem in this context is the typically
large number of genes compared to the number of observations (individuals).
Feature selection procedures can generate predictive models with high prediction 
accuracy and at the same time low model complexity. However, interpretability of 
the resulting models is still limited due to little knowledge on many of the
remaining selected genes. Thus, we summarize genes as gene groups defined by the 
hierarchically structured Gene Ontology (GO) and include these gene groups as
covariates in the hazard regression models. Since expression profiles within GO
groups are often heterogeneous, we present a new method to obtain subgroups with 
coherent patterns. We apply preclustering to genes within GO groups according to 
the correlation of their gene expression measurements.
RESULTS: We compare Cox models for modeling disease free survival times of breast
cancer patients. Besides classical clinical covariates we consider genes, GO
groups and preclustered GO groups as additional genomic covariates. Survival
models with preclustered gene groups as covariates have similar prediction
accuracy as models built only with single genes or GO groups.
CONCLUSIONS: The preclustering information enables a more detailed analysis of
the biological meaning of covariates selected in the final models. Compared to
models built only with single genes there is additional functional information
contained in the GO annotation, and compared to models using GO groups as
covariates the preclustering yields coherent representative gene expression
profiles.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2105-12-478 
PMCID: PMC3377939
PMID: 22177110  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Genet Epidemiol. 2012 Jan;36(1):3-16. doi: 10.1002/gepi.20632. Epub 2011 Dec 7.

Using the gene ontology to scan multilevel gene sets for associations in genome
wide association studies.

Schaid DJ(1), Sinnwell JP, Jenkins GD, McDonnell SK, Ingle JN, Kubo M, Goss PE,
Costantino JP, Wickerham DL, Weinshilboum RM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biomedical Statistics and Informatics, Department of Health
Sciences Research, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota 55905, USA. schaid@mayo.edu

Gene-set analyses have been widely used in gene expression studies, and some of
the developed methods have been extended to genome wide association studies
(GWAS). Yet, complications due to linkage disequilibrium (LD) among single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), and variable numbers of SNPs per gene and genes 
per gene-set, have plagued current approaches, often leading to ad hoc "fixes."
To overcome some of the current limitations, we developed a general approach to
scan GWAS SNP data for both gene-level and gene-set analyses, building on score
statistics for generalized linear models, and taking advantage of the directed
acyclic graph structure of the gene ontology when creating gene-sets. However,
other types of gene-set structures can be used, such as the popular Kyoto
Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG). Our approach combines SNPs into genes, 
and genes into gene-sets, but assures that positive and negative effects of genes
on a trait do not cancel. To control for multiple testing of many gene-sets, we
use an efficient computational strategy that accounts for LD and provides
accurate step-down adjusted P-values for each gene-set. Application of our
methods to two different GWAS provide guidance on the potential strengths and
weaknesses of our proposed gene-set analyses.

© 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/gepi.20632 
PMCID: PMC3310255
PMID: 22161999  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. J Biol Chem. 2012 Feb 10;287(7):4503-17. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.287771. Epub 2011 
Dec 9.

Genomic promoter occupancy of runt-related transcription factor RUNX2 in
Osteosarcoma cells identifies genes involved in cell adhesion and motility.

van der Deen M(1), Akech J, Lapointe D, Gupta S, Young DW, Montecino MA, Galindo 
M, Lian JB, Stein JL, Stein GS, van Wijnen AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Cell Biology, University of Massachusetts Medical School, 55 Lake
Ave. North, Worcester, MA 01655-0106, USA.

Runt-related transcription factors (RUNX1, RUNX2, and RUNX3) are key
lineage-specific regulators of progenitor cell growth and differentiation but
also function pathologically as cancer genes that contribute to tumorigenesis.
RUNX2 attenuates growth and stimulates maturation of osteoblasts during bone
formation but is also robustly expressed in a subset of osteosarcomas, as well as
in metastatic breast and prostate tumors. To assess the biological function of
RUNX2 in osteosarcoma cells, we examined human genomic promoter interactions for 
RUNX2 using chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)-microarray analysis in SAOS-2
cells. Promoter binding of both RUNX2 and RNA polymerase II was compared with
gene expression profiles of cells in which RUNX2 was depleted by RNA
interference. Many RUNX2-bound loci (1550 of 2339 total) exhibit promoter
occupancy by RNA polymerase II and contain the RUNX consensus motif
5'-((T/A/C)G(T/A/C)GG(T/G). Gene ontology analysis indicates that RUNX2 controls 
components of multiple signaling pathways (e.g. WNT, TGFβ, TNFα, and
interleukins), as well as genes linked to cell motility and adhesion (e.g. the
focal adhesion-related genes FAK/PTK2 and TLN1). Our results reveal that siRNA
depletion of RUNX2, PTK2, or TLN1 diminishes motility of U2OS osteosarcoma cells.
Thus, RUNX2 binding to diverse gene loci may support the biological properties of
osteosarcoma cells.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M111.287771 
PMCID: PMC3281617
PMID: 22158627  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. BMC Med Genomics. 2011 Nov 25;4:80. doi: 10.1186/1755-8794-4-80.

Analysis of BMP4 and BMP7 signaling in breast cancer cells unveils time-dependent
transcription patterns and highlights a common synexpression group of genes.

Rodriguez-Martinez A(1), Alarmo EL, Saarinen L, Ketolainen J, Nousiainen K,
Hautaniemi S, Kallioniemi A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cancer Genetics, Institute of Biomedical Technology, University 
of Tampere and Centre for Laboratory Medicine, Tampere University Hospital,
Finland.

BACKGROUND: Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) are members of the TGF-beta
superfamily of growth factors. They are known for their roles in regulation of
osteogenesis and developmental processes and, in recent years, evidence has
accumulated of their crucial functions in tumor biology. BMP4 and BMP7, in
particular, have been implicated in breast cancer. However, little is known about
BMP target genes in the context of tumor. We explored the effects of BMP4 and
BMP7 treatment on global gene transcription in seven breast cancer cell lines
during a 6-point time series, using a whole-genome oligo microarray. Data
analysis included hierarchical clustering of differentially expressed genes, gene
ontology enrichment analyses and model based clustering of temporal data.
RESULTS: Both ligands had a strong effect on gene expression, although the
response to BMP4 treatment was more pronounced. The cellular functions most
strongly affected by BMP signaling were regulation of transcription and
development. The observed transcriptional response, as well as its functional
outcome, followed a temporal sequence, with regulation of gene expression and
signal transduction leading to changes in metabolism and cell proliferation.
Hierarchical clustering revealed distinct differences in the response of
individual cell lines to BMPs, but also highlighted a synexpression group of
genes for both ligands. Interestingly, the majority of the genes within these
synexpression groups were shared by the two ligands, probably representing the
core molecular responses common to BMP4 and BMP7 signaling pathways.
CONCLUSIONS: All in all, we show that BMP signaling has a remarkable effect on
gene transcription in breast cancer cells and that the functions affected follow 
a logical temporal pattern. Our results also uncover components of the common
cellular transcriptional response to BMP4 and BMP7. Most importantly, this study 
provides a list of potential novel BMP target genes relevant in breast cancer.

DOI: 10.1186/1755-8794-4-80 
PMCID: PMC3229454
PMID: 22118688  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. BMC Med Genomics. 2011 Nov 1;4:77. doi: 10.1186/1755-8794-4-77.

Gene expression profiles of breast biopsies from healthy women identify a group
with claudin-low features.

Haakensen VD(1), Lingjaerde OC, Lüders T, Riis M, Prat A, Troester MA, Holmen MM,
Frantzen JO, Romundstad L, Navjord D, Bukholm IK, Johannesen TB, Perou CM, Ursin 
G, Kristensen VN, Børresen-Dale AL, Helland A.

Author information: 
(1)Dept of Genetics, Institute for Cancer Research, Oslo University Hospital
Radiumhospitalet, Norway.

BACKGROUND: Increased understanding of the variability in normal breast biology
will enable us to identify mechanisms of breast cancer initiation and the origin 
of different subtypes, and to better predict breast cancer risk.
METHODS: Gene expression patterns in breast biopsies from 79 healthy women
referred to breast diagnostic centers in Norway were explored by unsupervised
hierarchical clustering and supervised analyses, such as gene set enrichment
analysis and gene ontology analysis and comparison with previously published
genelists and independent datasets.
RESULTS: Unsupervised hierarchical clustering identified two separate clusters of
normal breast tissue based on gene-expression profiling, regardless of clustering
algorithm and gene filtering used. Comparison of the expression profile of the
two clusters with several published gene lists describing breast cells revealed
that the samples in cluster 1 share characteristics with stromal cells and stem
cells, and to a certain degree with mesenchymal cells and myoepithelial cells.
The samples in cluster 1 also share many features with the newly identified
claudin-low breast cancer intrinsic subtype, which also shows characteristics of 
stromal and stem cells. More women belonging to cluster 1 have a family history
of breast cancer and there is a slight overrepresentation of nulliparous women in
cluster 1. Similar findings were seen in a separate dataset consisting of
histologically normal tissue from both breasts harboring breast cancer and from
mammoplasty reductions.
CONCLUSION: This is the first study to explore the variability of gene expression
patterns in whole biopsies from normal breasts and identified distinct subtypes
of normal breast tissue. Further studies are needed to determine the specific
cell contribution to the variation in the biology of normal breasts, how the
clusters identified relate to breast cancer risk and their possible link to the
origin of the different molecular subtypes of breast cancer.

DOI: 10.1186/1755-8794-4-77 
PMCID: PMC3216859
PMID: 22044755  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2012 Feb;131(3):1003-12. doi: 10.1007/s10549-011-1789-3.
Epub 2011 Oct 15.

Normal breast tissue of obese women is enriched for macrophage markers and
macrophage-associated gene expression.

Sun X(1), Casbas-Hernandez P, Bigelow C, Makowski L, Joseph Jerry D, Smith
Schneider S, Troester MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Gillings School of Global Public Health,
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA.

Activation of inflammatory pathways is one plausible mechanism underlying the
association between obesity and increased breast cancer risk. However, macrophage
infiltration and local biomarkers of inflammation in breast adipose tissue have
seldom been studied in association with obesity. Gene expression profiles of
normal breast tissue from reduction mammoplasty patients were evaluated by whole 
genome microarrays to identify patterns associated with obesity status
(normal-weight, body mass index (BMI) <25; overweight, BMI 25-29.9; obese, BMI
≥30). The presence of macrophage-enriched inflammatory loci with immunopositivity
for CD68 protein was evaluated by immunohistochemistry (IHC). After adjusting for
confounding by age, 760 genes were differentially expressed (203 up and 557 down;
FDR = 0.026) between normal-weight and obese women. Gene ontology analysis
suggested significant enrichment for pathways involving IL-6, IL-8, CCR5
signaling in macrophages and RXRα and PPARα activation, consistent with a
pro-inflammatory state and suggestive of macrophage infiltration. Gene set
enrichment analysis also demonstrated that the genomic signatures of monocytes
and macrophages were over-represented in the obese group with FDR of 0.08 and
0.13, respectively. Increased macrophage infiltration was confirmed by IHC, which
showed that the breast adipose tissue of obese women had higher average
macrophage counts (mean = 8.96 vs. 3.56 in normal-weight women) and inflammatory 
foci counts (mean = 4.91 vs. 2.67 in normal-weight women). Obesity is associated 
with local inflammation and macrophage infiltration in normal human breast
adipose tissues. Given the role of macrophages in carcinogenesis, these findings 
have important implications for breast cancer etiology and progression.

DOI: 10.1007/s10549-011-1789-3 
PMCID: PMC3640411
PMID: 22002519  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. J Am Stat Assoc. 2010 Sep 1;105(491):1215-1227.

False Discovery Rate Control With Groups.

Hu JX(1), Zhao H, Zhou HH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Statistics, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06511.

In the context of large-scale multiple hypothesis testing, the hypotheses often
possess certain group structures based on additional information such as Gene
Ontology in gene expression data and phenotypes in genome-wide association
studies. It is hence desirable to incorporate such information when dealing with 
multiplicity problems to increase statistical power. In this article, we
demonstrate the benefit of considering group structure by presenting a p-value
weighting procedure which utilizes the relative importance of each group while
controlling the false discovery rate under weak conditions. The procedure is easy
to implement and shown to be more powerful than the classical Benjamini-Hochberg 
procedure in both theoretical and simulation studies. By estimating the
proportion of true null hypotheses, the data-driven procedure controls the false 
discovery rate asymptotically. Our analysis on one breast cancer dataset confirms
that the procedure performs favorably compared with the classical method.

DOI: 10.1198/jasa.2010.tm09329 
PMCID: PMC3175141
PMID: 21931466 


1. J Biomed Biotechnol. 2011;2011:597145. doi: 10.1155/2011/597145. Epub 2011 May
26.

Next-generation sequencing of microRNAs for breast cancer detection.

Wu Q(1), Lu Z, Li H, Lu J, Guo L, Ge Q.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Bioelectronics, School of Biological Science and
Medical Engineering, Southeast University, Sipailou 2, Nanjing 210096, China.
wuqian@njmu.edu.cn

It is reported that different microRNA (miRNA) profiles can be detected in the
blood of cancer patients. We investigated that whether the key serum miRNAs could
discriminate patients with and without breast cancer. This study was divided into
three parts: (1) miRNA marker discovery using SOLiD sequencing-based miRNA
profiling on cancerous and adjacent noncancerous breast tissue of one breast
cancer patient; (2) marker selection and validation by real-time PCR on a small
set of serum; (3) gene ontology analysis of the key miRNA target genes. Of
genome-wide tissue miRNA expression analysis, five miRNAs were found to be
altered more than fivefold by SOLiD sequencing (i.e., miR-29a, miR-23a, miR-23b, 
miR-192, and miR-21). All the five miRNAs were validated on the 20 breast cancer 
patients and 20 controls. miR-29a and miR-21 were significantly increased in the 
serum of breast cancer patients (P < .05). Gene ontology analysis of the target
genes revealed enrichment for special biological process categories, that is,
signal transduction, development, apoptosis, cell proliferation, and cell
adhesion. SOLiD sequencing provides a promising method for cancer-related miRNA
profiling. Serum miRNAs may be useful biomarkers for breast cancer detection.

DOI: 10.1155/2011/597145 
PMCID: PMC3118289
PMID: 21716661  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. BMC Genomics. 2011 Jun 29;12:333. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-12-333.

Influence of cell cycle on responses of MCF-7 cells to benzo[a]pyrene.

Hamouchene H(1), Arlt VM, Giddings I, Phillips DH.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Molecular Carcinogenesis, Institute of Cancer Research, Brookes
Lawley Building, Cotswold Road, Sutton, Surrey SM2 5NG, UK.
hamza.hamouchene@icr.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: Benzo[a]pyrene (BaP) is a widespread environmental genotoxic
carcinogen that damages DNA by forming adducts. This damage along with activation
of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) induces complex transcriptional responses 
in cells. To investigate whether human cells are more susceptible to BaP in a
particular phase of the cell cycle, synchronised breast carcinoma MCF-7 cells
were exposed to BaP. Cell cycle progression was analysed by flow cytometry, DNA
adduct formation was assessed by 32P-postlabeling analysis, microarrays of 44K
human genome-wide oligos and RT-PCR were used to detect gene expression (mRNA)
changes and Western blotting was performed to determine the expression of some
proteins, including cytochrome P450 (CYP) 1A1 and CYP1B1, which are involved in
BaP metabolism.
RESULTS: Following BaP exposure, cells evaded G1 arrest and accumulated in
S-phase. Higher levels of DNA damage occurred in S- and G2/M- compared with
G0/G1-enriched cultures. Genes that were found to have altered expression
included those involved in xenobiotic metabolism, apoptosis, cell cycle
regulation and DNA repair. Gene ontology and pathway analysis showed the
involvement of various signalling pathways in response to BaP exposure, such as
the Catenin/Wnt pathway in G1, the ERK pathway in G1 and S, the Nrf2 pathway in S
and G2/M and the Akt pathway in G2/M. An important finding was that higher levels
of DNA damage in S- and G2/M-enriched cultures correlated with higher levels of
CYP1A1 and CYP1B1 mRNA and proteins. Moreover, exposure of synchronised MCF-7
cells to BaP-7,8-diol-9,10-epoxide (BPDE), the ultimate carcinogenic metabolite
of BaP, did not result in significant changes in DNA adduct levels at different
phases of the cell cycle.
CONCLUSIONS: This study characterised the complex gene response to BaP in MCF-7
cells and revealed a strong correlation between the varying efficiency of BaP
metabolism and DNA damage in different phases of the cell cycle. Our results
suggest that growth kinetics within a target-cell population may be important
determinants of susceptibility and response to a genotoxic agent.

© 2011 Hamouchene et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2164-12-333 
PMCID: PMC3145607
PMID: 21714911  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. J Integr Bioinform. 2011 Jun 21;8(2):155. doi: 10.2390/biecoll-jib-2011-155.

CASSys: an integrated software-system for the interactive analysis of ChIP-seq
data.

Alawi M(1), Kurtz S, Beckstette M.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Bioinformatics, University of Hamburg, Bundesstraße 43, D-20146
Hamburg, Germany.

The mapping of DNA-protein interactions is crucial for a full understanding of
transcriptional regulation. Chromatin-immunoprecipitation followed by massively
parallel sequencing (ChIP-seq) has become the standard technique for analyzing
these interactions on a genome-wide scale. We have developed a software system
called CASSys (ChIP-seq data Analysis Software System) spanning all steps of
ChIP-seq data analysis. It supersedes the laborious application of several single
command line tools. CASSys provides functionality ranging from quality assessment
and -control of short reads, over the mapping of reads against a reference genome
(readmapping) and the detection of enriched regions (peakdetection) to various
follow-up analyses. The latter are accessible via a state-of-the-art web
interface and can be performed interactively by the user. The follow-up analyses 
allow for flexible user defined association of putative interaction sites with
genes, visualization of their genomic context with an integrated genome browser, 
the detection of putative binding motifs, the identification of over-represented 
Gene Ontology-terms, pathway analysis and the visualization of interaction
networks. The system is client-server based, accessible via a web browser and
does not require any software installation on the client side. To demonstrate
CASSys's functionality we used the system for the complete data analysis of a
publicly available Chip-seq study that investigated the role of the transcription
factor estrogen receptor-α in breast cancer cells.

DOI: 10.2390/biecoll-jib-2011-155 
PMID: 21690655  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Proteomics. 2011 Jul;11(13):2683-92. doi: 10.1002/pmic.201000801. Epub 2011 May
31.

Quantitative chemical proteomics in small-scale culture of phorbol ester
stimulated basal breast cancer cells.

Dolai S(1), Xu Q, Liu F, Molloy MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biomolecular Sciences, Faculty of Science,
Macquarie University, Sydney, Australia.

Basal-like breast cancers are commonly negative for expression of estrogen and
progesterone receptors and HER-2 (triple-negative breast cancer), which makes
this subtype of breast cancers more aggressive and less responsive to standard
treatment. We have applied a small-scale chemical proteomics method using
bisindolylmaleimide (Bis) class of protein kinase C inhibitors to study the
Bis-binding proteome in a cell culture model of basal breast carcinoma
(MDA-MB-231). Using MS, we identified 174 proteins captured by the Bis-probe in
phorbol ester (PMA) stimulated cells. Gene ontology analysis broadly categorised 
these proteins as ATP binding (42%), GTP binding (6%) and having
nucleoside-triphosphatase activity (21%). Of the 64 enzymes captured by the
Bis-probe, the majority had either ATP and/or nucleotide binding functions. Two
previously unreported Bis binding protein kinases, serine/arginine-rich
protein-specific kinase 1 (SRPK1) and interferon-induced RNA-dependent protein
kinase (PKR) were observed. We then incorporated SILAC for quantitation to
examine the proteins that were differentially captured by the Bis-probe following
30 and 60 min PMA stimulation. This provided novel evidence for PMA regulation of
the enzymes glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase, nucleolar RNA helicase 2
and Heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein M.

Copyright © 2011 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/pmic.201000801 
PMID: 21630460  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. J Pineal Res. 2011 Oct;51(3):345-52. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-079X.2011.00896.x. Epub 
2011 May 26.

MicroRNA and gene expression analysis of melatonin-exposed human breast cancer
cell lines indicating involvement of the anticancer effect.

Lee SE(1), Kim SJ, Youn JP, Hwang SY, Park CS, Park YS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, School of Medicine, Kyung Hee University, Seoul,
Korea.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small, noncoding RNAs that play a crucial role in
regulation of gene expression. Recent studies have shown that miRNAs implicated
in initiation and progression of various human cancers, including breast cancer
and also analysis of miRNA expression profiles in cancer provide new insights
into potential mechanisms of carcinogenesis. Melatonin,
N-acetyl-5-methoxytryptamine, is synthesized by the pineal gland in response to
the dark/light cycle and has been known to act as a synchronizer of the
biological clock. Melatonin has a variety of therapeutic effects, such as
immunomodulatory actions, anti-inflammatory effects, and antioxidant actions.
Furthermore, melatonin is reported to have an anticancer function including
suppression of the metabolism of tumor cells and induction of tumor suppressor
genes in cancer cells, including breast cancer cells. In this study, we
determined whether miRNAs play a role in regulation of various gene expression
responses to melatonin in MCF-7 human breast cancer cells. We examined
whole-genome miRNA and mRNA expression and found that 22 miRNAs were
differentially expressed in melatonin-treated MCF-7 cells. We further identified 
a number of mRNAs whose expression level shows a high inverse correlation with
miRNA expression. The Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment analysis and pathways
analysis were performed for identification of the signaling pathways and
biological processes affected by differential expression of miRNA and
miRNA-related genes. Our findings suggested that melatonin may modulate miRNA and
gene expression as an anticancer mechanism in human breast cancer cells.

© 2011 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-079X.2011.00896.x 
PMID: 21615491  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. J Bioinform Comput Biol. 2011 Apr;9(2):269-82.

Comparing multiple ChIP-sequencing experiments.

Ozer HG(1), Huang YW, Wu J, Parvin JD, Huang TH, Huang K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Informatics, The Ohio State University , Columbus,
OH, 43210, USA. gulcin.ozer@osumc.edu

New high-throughput sequencing technologies can generate millions of short
sequences in a single experiment. As the size of the data increases, comparison
of multiple experiments on different cell lines under different experimental
conditions becomes a big challenge. In this paper, we investigate ways to compare
multiple ChIP-sequencing experiments. We specifically studied epigenetic
regulation of breast cancer and the effect of estrogen using 50 ChIP-sequencing
data from Illumina Genome Analyzer II. First, we evaluate the correlation among
different experiments focusing on the total number of reads in transcribed and
promoter regions of the genome. Then, we adopt the method that is used to
identify the most stable genes in RT-PCR experiments to understand background
signal across all of the experiments and to identify the most variable
transcribed and promoter regions of the genome. We observed that the most
variable genes for transcribed regions and promoter regions are very distinct.
Gene ontology and function enrichment analysis on these most variable genes
demonstrate the biological relevance of the results. In this study, we present a 
method that can effectively select differential regions of the genome based on
protein-binding profiles over multiple experiments using real data points without
any normalization among the samples.


PMCID: PMC4289603
PMID: 21523932  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Radiat Oncol. 2011 Apr 26;6:42. doi: 10.1186/1748-717X-6-42.

Gene expression profiling of human dermal fibroblasts exposed to bleomycin
sulphate does not differentiate between radiation sensitive and control patients.

Westbury CB(1), Sahlberg KK, Borresen-Dale AL, Isacke CM, Yarnold JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiotherapy, The Royal Marsden NHS Foundation Trust & Institute
of Cancer Research, Downs Road, Sutton, Surrey, SM2 5PT, UK.

BACKGROUND: Gene expression profiling of the transcriptional response of human
dermal fibroblasts to in vitro radiation has shown promise as a predictive test
of radiosensitivity. This study tested if treatment with the radiomimetic drug
bleomycin sulphate could be used to differentiate radiation sensitive patients
and controls in patients who had previously received radiotherapy for early
breast cancer.
FINDINGS: Eight patients who developed marked late radiation change assessed by
photographic breast appearance and 8 matched patients without any change were
selected from women entered in a prospective randomised trial of breast
radiotherapy fractionation. Gene expression profiling of primary skin fibroblasts
exposed in vitro to bleomycin sulphate and mock treated fibroblast controls was
performed. 973 genes were up-regulated and 923 down-regulated in bleomycin
sulphate treated compared to mock treated control fibroblasts. Gene ontology
analysis revealed enriched groups were cellular localisation, apoptosis, cell
cycle and DNA damage response for the deregulated genes. No transcriptional
differences were identified between fibroblasts from radiation sensitive cases
and control patients; subgroup analysis using cases exhibiting severe radiation
sensitivity or with high risk alleles present in TGF β1 also showed no
difference.
CONCLUSIONS: The transcriptional response of human dermal fibroblasts to
bleomycin sulphate has been characterised. No differences between clinically
radiation sensitive and control patients were detected using this approach.

DOI: 10.1186/1748-717X-6-42 
PMCID: PMC3107791
PMID: 21521514  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Genome Res. 2011 May;21(5):741-7. doi: 10.1101/gr.115295.110. Epub 2011 Apr 7.

Differential genome-wide profiling of tandem 3' UTRs among human breast cancer
and normal cells by high-throughput sequencing.

Fu Y(1), Sun Y, Li Y, Li J, Rao X, Chen C, Xu A.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory for Biocontrol, Guangdong Province Key Laboratory of
Pharmaceutical Functional Genes, Department of Biochemistry, College of Life
Sciences, Sun Yat-sen University, Higher Education Mega Center, Guangzhou 510006,
P.R. China.

Tandem 3' UTRs produced by alternative polyadenylation (APA) play an important
role in gene expression by impacting mRNA stability, translation, and
translocation in cells. Several studies have investigated APA site switching in
various physiological states; nevertheless, they only focused on either the genes
with two known APA sites or several candidate genes. Here, we developed a
strategy to study APA sites in a genome-wide fashion with second-generation
sequencing technology which could not only identify new polyadenylation sites but
also analyze the APA site switching of all genes, especially those with more than
two APA sites. We used this strategy to explore the profiling of APA sites in two
human breast cancer cell lines, MCF7 and MB231, and one cultured mammary
epithelial cell line, MCF10A. More than half of the identified polyadenylation
sites are not included in human poly(A) databases. While MCF7 showed shortening
3' UTRs, more genes in MB231 switched to distal poly(A) sites. Several gene
ontology (GO) terms and pathways were enriched in the list of genes with switched
APA sites, including cell cycle, apoptosis, and metabolism. These results suggest
a more complex regulation of APA sites in cancer cells than previously thought.
In short, our novel unbiased method can be a powerful approach to
cost-effectively investigate the complex mechanism of 3' UTR switching in a
genome-wide fashion among various physiological processes and diseases.

DOI: 10.1101/gr.115295.110 
PMCID: PMC3083091
PMID: 21474764  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Mol Oncol. 2011 Feb;5(1):61-76. doi: 10.1016/j.molonc.2010.11.004. Epub 2010 Nov 
25.

Methylation profiling with a panel of cancer related genes: association with
estrogen receptor, TP53 mutation status and expression subtypes in sporadic
breast cancer.

Rønneberg JA(1), Fleischer T, Solvang HK, Nordgard SH, Edvardsen H, Potapenko I, 
Nebdal D, Daviaud C, Gut I, Bukholm I, Naume B, Børresen-Dale AL, Tost J,
Kristensen V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Institute for Cancer Research, Oslo University
Hospital Radiumhospitalet, Oslo, Norway.

Breast cancer is a heterogeneous disease that can be divided in subtypes based on
histology, gene expression profiles as well as differences in genomic
aberrations. Distinct global DNA methylation profiles have been reported in
normal breast epithelial cells as well as in breast tumors. However, the
influence of the tumor methylome on the previously described subgroups of breast 
cancer is not fully understood. Here we report the DNA methylation profiles of 80
breast tumors using a panel of 807 cancer related genes interrogating 1505 CpG
sites. We identified three major clusters based on the methylation profiles; one 
consisting of mainly tumors of myoepithelial origin and two other clusters with
tumors of predominantly luminal epithelial origin. The clusters were different
with respect to estrogen receptor status, TP53 status, ErbB2 status and grade.
The most significantly differentially methylated genes including HDAC1, TFF1,
OGG1, BMP3, FZD9 and HOXA11 were confirmed by pyrosequencing. Gene Ontology
analysis revealed enrichment for genes involved in developmental processes
including homeobox domain genes (HOXA9, HOXA11, PAX6, MYBL2, ISL1 and IPF1) and
(ETS1, HDAC1, CREBBP, GAS7, SPI1 and TBX1). Extensive correlation to mRNA
expression was observed. Pathway analyses identified a significant association
with canonical (curated) pathways such as hepatic fibrosis including genes like
EGF, NGFR and TNF, dendritic cell maturation and the NF-κB signaling pathway. Our
results show that breast tumor expression subtypes harbor major epigenetic
differences and tumors with similar gene expression profiles might belong to
epigenetically different subtypes. Some of the transcription factors identified, 
with key roles in differentiation and development might play a role in inducing
and maintaining the different phenotypes.

Copyright © 2010 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molonc.2010.11.004 
PMID: 21212030  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2011 Feb 2;103(3):264-72. doi: 10.1093/jnci/djq524. Epub 2010
Dec 29.

Gene pathways associated with prognosis and chemotherapy sensitivity in molecular
subtypes of breast cancer.

Iwamoto T(1), Bianchini G, Booser D, Qi Y, Coutant C, Shiang CY, Santarpia L,
Matsuoka J, Hortobagyi GN, Symmans WF, Holmes FA, O'Shaughnessy J, Hellerstedt B,
Pippen J, Andre F, Simon R, Pusztai L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Breast Medical Oncology, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson 
Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77230-1439, USA.

BACKGROUND: We hypothesized that distinct biological processes might be
associated with prognosis and chemotherapy sensitivity in the different types of 
breast cancers.
METHODS: We performed gene set analyses with BRB-ArrayTools statistical software 
including 2331 functionally annotated gene sets (ie, lists of genes that
correspond to a particular biological pathway or biochemical function) assembled 
from Ingenuity Pathway Analysis and Gene Ontology databases corresponding to
almost all known biological processes. Gene set analysis was performed on gene
expression data from three cohorts of 234, 170, and 175 patients with HER2-normal
lymph node-negative breast cancer who received no systemic adjuvant therapy to
identify gene sets associated prognosis and three additional cohorts of 198, 85, 
and 62 patients with HER2-normal stage I-III breast cancer who received
preoperative chemotherapy to identify gene sets associated with pathological
complete response to therapy. These analyses were performed separately for
estrogen receptor (ER)-positive and ER-negative breast cancers. Interaction
between gene sets and survival and treatment response by breast cancer subtype
was assessed in individual datasets and also in pooled datasets. Statistical
significance was estimated with permutation test. All statistical tests were
two-sided.
RESULTS: For ER-positive cancers, from 370 to 434 gene sets were associated with 
prognosis (P ≤ .05) and from 209 to 267 gene sets were associated with
chemotherapy response in analysis by individual dataset. For ER-positive cancers,
131 gene sets were associated with prognosis and 69 were associated with
pathological complete response (P ≤.001) in pooled analysis. Increased expression
of cell cycle-related gene sets was associated with poor prognosis, and B-cell
immunity-related gene sets were associated with good prognosis. For ER-negative
cancers, from 175 to 288 gene sets were associated with prognosis and from 212 to
285 gene sets were associated with chemotherapy response. In pooled analyses of
ER-negative cancers, 14 gene sets were associated with prognosis and 23 were
associated with response. Gene sets involved in sphingolipid and glycolipid
metabolism were associated with better prognosis and those involved in base
excision repair, cell aging, and spindle microtubule regulation were associated
with chemotherapy response.
CONCLUSION: Different biological processes were associated with prognosis and
chemotherapy response in ER-positive and ER-negative breast cancers.

DOI: 10.1093/jnci/djq524 
PMID: 21191116  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Brief Bioinform. 2011 Sep;12(5):518-29. doi: 10.1093/bib/bbq082. Epub 2010 Dec
22.

Literature-aided interpretation of gene expression data with the weighted global 
test.

Jelier R(1), Goeman JJ, Hettne KM, Schuemie MJ, den Dunnen JT, 't Hoen PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The
Netherlands.

Most methods for the interpretation of gene expression profiling experiments rely
on the categorization of genes, as provided by the Gene Ontology (GO) and pathway
databases. Due to the manual curation process, such databases are never
up-to-date and tend to be limited in focus and coverage. Automated literature
mining tools provide an attractive, alternative approach. We review how they can 
be employed for the interpretation of gene expression profiling experiments. We
illustrate that their comprehensive scope aids the interpretation of data from
domains poorly covered by GO or alternative databases, and allows for the linking
of gene expression with diseases, drugs, tissues and other types of concepts. A
framework for proper statistical evaluation of the associations between gene
expression values and literature concepts was lacking and is now implemented in a
weighted extension of global test. The weights are the literature association
scores and reflect the importance of a gene for the concept of interest. In a
direct comparison with classical GO-based gene sets, we show that use of
literature-based associations results in the identification of much more specific
GO categories. We demonstrate the possibilities for linking of gene expression
data to patient survival in breast cancer and the action and metabolism of drugs.
Coupling with online literature mining tools ensures transparency and allows
further study of the identified associations. Literature mining tools are
therefore powerful additions to the toolbox for the interpretation of
high-throughput genomics data.

DOI: 10.1093/bib/bbq082 
PMID: 21183478  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Poult Sci. 2011 Jan;90(1):136-46. doi: 10.3382/ps.2010-01018.

A comparative transcriptomic study of vitamin E and an algae-based antioxidant as
antioxidative agents: investigation of replacing vitamin E with the algae-based
antioxidant in broiler diets.

Xiao R(1), Power RF, Mallonee D, Crowdus C, Brennan KM, Ao T, Pierce JL, Dawson
KA.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Animal Nutrigenomics and Applied Animal Nutrition, Alltech,
Nicholasville, KY 40356, USA. rxiao@Alltech.com

Previous study indicated that inclusion of an algae-based antioxidant as an
antioxidative agent [EconomasE, Alltech, Nicholasville, KY; EcoE] significantly
reduced the amount of vitamin E (VE) required in broiler diets without
compromising performance and meat quality. To assess the mechanisms related to
the VE-saving activity of EcoE, as well as other potential functions related to
EcoE and VE supplementation, we analyzed gene expression profiles of breast
muscle from broilers fed a control diet, the control diet + 50 IU of VE/kg, the
control diet + 100 IU of VE/kg, or the control diet + 200 g of EcoE/ton.
Evaluation of the serum antioxidant capacity indicated that dietary
supplementation of either a high level of VE (50 or 100 IU of VE/kg) or EcoE
significantly improved bird antioxidant status. Analysis of gene expression
profiles indicated that expression of 542 genes of the breast muscle were altered
(P < 0.05, fold change >1.2) by dietary treatments, of which a significant part
were commonly regulated by EcoE and VE (especially the control diet + 50 IU of
VE/kg). In addition to the process of cellular oxidation, gene ontology analysis 
indicated the involvement of EcoE and VE on cell morphology, skeletal and
muscular system development and function, immune response, and multiple metabolic
processes, including lipid, carbohydrate, and drug metabolism. Results of this
experiment indicate that the biological roles of high VE, including its activity 
as an antioxidant, can be greatly mimicked at the transcriptional level by EcoE, 
and they suggest a relationship of functional redundancy between VE and EcoE in
the broiler diets.

DOI: 10.3382/ps.2010-01018 
PMID: 21177453  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. BMC Syst Biol. 2010 Dec 17;4:170. doi: 10.1186/1752-0509-4-170.

Inference of hierarchical regulatory network of estrogen-dependent breast cancer 
through ChIP-based data.

Gu F(1), Hsu HK, Hsu PY, Wu J, Ma Y, Parvin J, Huang TH, Jin VX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Informatics, The Ohio State University, Columbus,
USA.

BACKGROUND: Global profiling of in vivo protein-DNA interactions using ChIP-based
technologies has evolved rapidly in recent years. Although many genome-wide
studies have identified thousands of ERα binding sites and have revealed the
associated transcription factor (TF) partners, such as AP1, FOXA1 and CEBP,
little is known about ERα associated hierarchical transcriptional regulatory
networks.
RESULTS: In this study, we applied computational approaches to analyze three
public available ChIP-based datasets: ChIP-seq, ChIP-PET and ChIP-chip, and to
investigate the hierarchical regulatory network for ERα and ERα partner TFs
regulation in estrogen-dependent breast cancer MCF7 cells. 16 common TFs and two 
common new TF partners (RORA and PITX2) were found among ChIP-seq, ChIP-chip and 
ChIP-PET datasets. The regulatory networks were constructed by scanning the
ChIP-peak region with TF specific position weight matrix (PWM). A permutation
test was performed to test the reliability of each connection of the network. We 
then used DREM software to perform gene ontology function analysis on the common 
genes. We found that FOS, PITX2, RORA and FOXA1 were involved in the up-regulated
genes.We also conducted the ERα and Pol-II ChIP-seq experiments in tamoxifen
resistance MCF7 cells (denoted as MCF7-T in this study) and compared the
difference between MCF7 and MCF7-T cells. The result showed very little overlap
between these two cells in terms of targeted genes (21.2% of common genes) and
targeted TFs (25% of common TFs). The significant dissimilarity may indicate
totally different transcriptional regulatory mechanisms between these two cancer 
cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study uncovers new estrogen-mediated regulatory networks by
mining three ChIP-based data in MCF7 cells and ChIP-seq data in MCF7-T cells. We 
compared the different ChIP-based technologies as well as different breast cancer
cells. Our computational analytical approach may guide biologists to further
study the underlying mechanisms in breast cancer cells or other human diseases.

DOI: 10.1186/1752-0509-4-170 
PMCID: PMC3012048
PMID: 21167036  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Genet Epidemiol. 2010 Dec;34(8):863-78. doi: 10.1002/gepi.20542.

Using biological knowledge to discover higher order interactions in genetic
association studies.

Chen GK(1), Thomas DC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biostatics, Department of Preventive Medicine, University of
Southern California, Los Angeles, California 90089-9601, USA. gary.k.chen@usc.edu

The recent successes of genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have revealed that
many of the replicated findings have explained only a small fraction of the
heritability of common diseases. One hypothesis that investigators have suggested
is that higher order interactions between SNPs or SNPs and environmental risk
factors may account for some of this missing heritability. Searching for these
interactions poses great statistical and computational challenges. In this
article, we propose a novel method that addresses these challenges by
incorporating external biological knowledge into a fully Bayesian analysis. The
method is designed to be scalable for high-dimensional search spaces (where it
supports interactions of any order) because priors that use such knowledge focus 
the search in regions that are more biologically plausible and avoid having to
enumerate all possible interactions. We provide several examples based on
simulated data demonstrating how external information can enhance power,
specificity, and effect estimates in comparison to conventional approaches based 
on maximum likelihood estimates. We also apply the method to data from a GWAS for
breast cancer, revealing a set of interactions enriched for the Gene Ontology
terms growth, metabolic process, and biological regulation.

© 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/gepi.20542 
PMID: 21104889  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. BMC Cancer. 2010 Nov 16;10:628. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-10-628.

Merging transcriptomics and metabolomics--advances in breast cancer profiling.

Borgan E(1), Sitter B, Lingjærde OC, Johnsen H, Lundgren S, Bathen TF, Sørlie T, 
Børresen-Dale AL, Gribbestad IS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Institute for Cancer Research, Division of Surgery and
Cancer, Oslo University Hospital Radiumhospitalet, Oslo, Norway.

BACKGROUND: Combining gene expression microarrays and high resolution magic angle
spinning magnetic resonance spectroscopy (HR MAS MRS) of the same tissue samples 
enables comparison of the transcriptional and metabolic profiles of breast
cancer. The aim of this study was to explore the potential of combining these two
different types of information.
METHODS: Breast cancer tissue from 46 patients was analyzed by HR MAS MRS
followed by gene expression microarrays. Two strategies were used to combine the 
gene expression and metabolic data; first using multivariate analyses to identify
different groups based on gene expression and metabolic data; second correlating 
levels of specific metabolites to transcripts to suggest new hypotheses of
connections between metabolite levels and the underlying biological processes. A 
parallel study was designed to address experimental issues of combining
microarrays and HR MAS MRS.
RESULTS: In the first strategy, using the microarray data and previously reported
molecular classification methods, the majority of samples were classified as
luminal A. Three subgroups of luminal A tumors were identified based on
hierarchical clustering of the HR MAS MR spectra. The samples in one of the
subgroups, designated A2, showed significantly lower glucose and higher alanine
levels than the other luminal A samples, suggesting a higher glycolytic activity 
in these tumors. This group was also enriched for genes annotated with Gene
Ontology (GO) terms related to cell cycle and DNA repair. In the second strategy,
the correlations between concentrations of myo-inositol, glycine, taurine,
glycerophosphocholine, phosphocholine, choline and creatine and all transcripts
in the filtered microarray data were investigated. GO-terms related to the
extracellular matrix were enriched among the genes that correlated the most to
myo-inositol and taurine, while cell cycle related GO-terms were enriched for the
genes that correlated the most to choline. Additionally, a subset of transcripts 
was identified to have slightly altered expression after HR MAS MRS and was
therefore removed from all other analyses.
CONCLUSIONS: Combining transcriptional and metabolic data from the same breast
carcinoma sample is feasible and may contribute to a more refined
subclassification of breast cancers as well as reveal relations between metabolic
and transcriptional levels. See Commentary:
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7015/8/73.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2407-10-628 
PMCID: PMC2996395
PMID: 21080935  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. BMC Genomics. 2010 Nov 2;11 Suppl 2:S12. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-11-S2-S12.

Discovery of pathway biomarkers from coupled proteomics and systems biology
methods.

Zhang F(1), Chen JY.

Author information: 
(1)Indiana University School of Informatics, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.
fanzhan@iupui.edu

BACKGROUND: Breast cancer is worldwide the second most common type of cancer
after lung cancer. Plasma proteome profiling may have a higher chance to identify
protein changes between plasma samples such as normal and breast cancer tissues. 
Breast cancer cell lines have long been used by researches as model system for
identifying protein biomarkers. A comparison of the set of proteins which change 
in plasma with previously published findings from proteomic analysis of human
breast cancer cell lines may identify with a higher confidence a subset of
candidate protein biomarker.
RESULTS: In this study, we analyzed a liquid chromatography (LC) coupled tandem
mass spectrometry (MS/MS) proteomics dataset from plasma samples of 40 healthy
women and 40 women diagnosed with breast cancer. Using a two-sample t-statistics 
and permutation procedure, we identified 254 statistically significant,
differentially expressed proteins, among which 208 are over-expressed and 46 are 
under-expressed in breast cancer plasma. We validated this result against
previously published proteomic results of human breast cancer cell lines and
signaling pathways to derive 25 candidate protein biomarkers in a panel. Using
the pathway analysis, we observed that the 25 "activated" plasma proteins were
present in several cancer pathways, including 'Complement and coagulation
cascades', 'Regulation of actin cytoskeleton', and 'Focal adhesion', and match
well with previously reported studies. Additional gene ontology analysis of the
25 proteins also showed that cellular metabolic process and response to external 
stimulus (especially proteolysis and acute inflammatory response) were enriched
functional annotations of the proteins identified in the breast cancer plasma
samples. By cross-validation using two additional proteomics studies, we obtained
86% and 83% similarities in pathway-protein matrix between the first study and
the two testing studies, which is much better than the similarity we measured
with proteins.
CONCLUSIONS: We presented a 'systems biology' method to identify, characterize,
analyze and validate panel biomarkers in breast cancer proteomics data, which
includes 1) t statistics and permutation process, 2) network, pathway and
function annotation analysis, and 3) cross-validation of multiple studies. Our
results showed that the systems biology approach is essential to the
understanding molecular mechanisms of panel protein biomarkers.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2164-11-S2-S12 
PMCID: PMC2975409
PMID: 21047379  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Mol Endocrinol. 2010 Dec;24(12):2292-302. doi: 10.1210/me.2010-0289. Epub 2010
Oct 27.

Mechanisms of progesterone receptor inhibition of inflammatory responses in
cellular models of breast cancer.

Kobayashi S(1), Stice JP, Kazmin D, Wittmann BM, Kimbrel EA, Edwards DP, Chang
CY, McDonnell DP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Cancer Biology, Duke University Medical Center,
Durham, North Carolina 27710, USA.

Both pro- and antimitogenic activities have been ascribed to progesterone
receptor (PR) agonists and antagonists in breast cancer cells; however, the
transcriptional responses that underlie these paradoxical functions are not
apparent. Using nontransformed, normal human mammary epithelial cells engineered 
to express PR and standard microarray technology, we defined 2370 genes that were
significantly regulated by the PR agonist R5020. Gene ontology (GO) analysis
revealed that GO terms involved in inflammation and nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB)
signaling were among the most significantly regulated. Interestingly, on those
NF-κB responsive genes that were inhibited by agonist-activated PR, antagonists
either 1) mimicked the actions of agonists or 2) reversed the inhibitory actions 
of agonists. This difference in pharmacological response could be attributed to
the fact that although agonist- and antagonist-activated PR is recruited to
NF-κB-responsive promoters, the physical presence of PR tethered to the promoter 
of some genes is sufficient for transcriptional inhibition, whereas on others, an
agonist-activated PR conformation is required for inhibition of NF-κB signaling. 
Importantly, the actions of PR on the latter class of genes were reversed by an
activation function-2-inhibiting, LXXLL-containing peptide. Consideration of the 
relative activities of these distinct antiinflammatory pathways in breast cancer 
may be instructive with respect to the likely therapeutic activity of PR agonists
or antagonists in the treatment of breast cancer.

DOI: 10.1210/me.2010-0289 
PMCID: PMC2999472
PMID: 20980435  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2010 Nov;9(11):2529-44. doi: 10.1074/mcp.M110.000398. Epub
2010 Aug 25.

In situ proteomic analysis of human breast cancer epithelial cells using laser
capture microdissection: annotation by protein set enrichment analysis and gene
ontology.

Cha S(1), Imielinski MB, Rejtar T, Richardson EA, Thakur D, Sgroi DC, Karger BL.

Author information: 
(1)Barnett Institute, Northeastern University, MA 02115, USA.

Identification of molecular signatures that allow detection of the transition
from normal breast epithelial cells to malignant invasive cells is a critical
component in the development of diagnostic, therapeutic, and preventative
strategies for human breast cancer. Substantial efforts have been devoted to
deciphering breast cancer etiology at the genome level, but only a limited number
of studies have appeared at the proteome level. In this work, we compared
individual in situ proteome profiles of nonpatient matched nine noncancerous,
normal breast epithelial (NBE) samples with nine estrogen receptor (ER)-positive 
(luminal subtype), invasive malignant breast epithelial (MBE) samples by
combining laser capture microdissection (LCM) and quantitative shotgun
proteomics. A total of 12,970 unique peptides were identified from the 18
samples, and 1623 proteins were selected for quantitative analysis using spectral
index (SpI) as a measure of protein abundance. A total of 298 proteins were
differentially expressed between NBE and MBE at 95% confidence level, and this
differential expression correlated well with immunohistochemistry (IHC) results
reported in the Human Protein Atlas (HPA) database. To assess pathway level
patterns in the observed expression changes, we developed protein set enrichment 
analysis (PSEA), a modification of a well-known approach in gene expression
analysis, Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA). Unlike single gene-based
functional term enrichment analyses that only examines pathway overrepresentation
of proteins above a given significance threshold, PSEA applies a weighted running
sum statistic to the entire expression data to discover significantly enriched
protein groups. Application of PSEA to the expression data in this study revealed
not only well-known ER-dependent and cellular morphology-dependent protein
abundance changes, but also significant alterations of downstream targets for
multiple transcription factors (TFs), suggesting a role for specific gene
regulatory pathways in breast tumorigenesis. A parallel GOMiner analysis revealed
both confirmatory and complementary data to PSEA. The combination of the two
annotation approaches yielded extensive biological feature mapping for in depth
analysis of the quantitative proteomic data.

DOI: 10.1074/mcp.M110.000398 
PMCID: PMC2984225
PMID: 20739354  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2010 Sep 10;400(1):34-8. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.07.132. Epub 2010 Aug 4.

ER regulates an evolutionarily conserved apoptosis pathway.

Liu Z(1), Chen S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medicinal Plant Development, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences,
Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 100193, China. zhliu@implad.ac.cn

Estrogen receptor (ER) is regarded as a major causal factor in breast cancer and 
FoxA1, a winged-helix transcription factor belonging to the forkhead family, has 
been found to function as a pioneer factor in the recruitment of ER to several
cis-regulatory elements in the genome. High throughput chromatin
immunoprecipitation analyzed by hybridization to microarrays (ChIP-chip) can
reveal ER and FoxA1 binding sites occupied by transcription factors. However,
these results are blind to lineage-specific cis-regulatory elements. In this
study, we identified ER and FoxA1 binding sites conserved in evolution by using
Detection of LinEage-Specific Selection (DLESS) method. We also analyzed target
genes close to conserved cis-regulatory elements by combining gene-expression
data. A total of 7877 ER binding sites and 18,135 FoxA1 binding sites were
identified in MCF-7 cells by performing an unbiased genome-wide ChIP-chip with
False Discovery Rate (FDR) of 5%. Using DLESS method, we found target candidate
genes closest to fully conserved cis-regulatory elements related to apoptosis
according to gene ontology analysis. Furthermore, network analysis of
apoptosis-related genes within 10 kb of fully conserved cis-regulatory elements
was constructed using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA). Apoptosis genes in the
network showed over- and under-expression in MCF-7 cell-line. And these
apoptosis-related genes closest to fully conserved cis-regulatory elements in
network showed strong correlation with ER in MCF-7 cells. These results elucidate
that ER regulates an evolutionarily conserved apoptosis pathway. This opens up
new perspectives in the apoptosis of human breast cancer from the evolution of
cis-regulatory elements.

Crown Copyright © 2010. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.07.132 
PMID: 20691160  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. BMC Syst Biol. 2010 May 27;4:74. doi: 10.1186/1752-0509-4-74.

Co-expression module analysis reveals biological processes, genomic gain, and
regulatory mechanisms associated with breast cancer progression.

Shi Z(1), Derow CK, Zhang B.

Author information: 
(1)Advanced Computing Center for Research & Education, Vanderbilt University,
Nashville, TN 37240, USA.

BACKGROUND: Gene expression signatures are typically identified by correlating
gene expression patterns to a disease phenotype of interest. However, individual 
gene-based signatures usually suffer from low reproducibility and
interpretability.
RESULTS: We have developed a novel algorithm Iterative Clique Enumeration (ICE)
for identifying relatively independent maximal cliques as co-expression modules
and a module-based approach to the analysis of gene expression data. Applying
this approach on a public breast cancer dataset identified 19 modules whose
expression levels were significantly correlated with tumor grade. The
correlations were reproducible for 17 modules in an independent breast cancer
dataset, and the reproducibility was considerably higher than that based on
individual genes or modules identified by other algorithms. Sixteen out of the 17
modules showed significant enrichment in certain Gene Ontology (GO) categories.
Specifically, modules related to cell proliferation and immune response were
up-regulated in high-grade tumors while those related to cell adhesion was
down-regulated. Further analyses showed that transcription factors NYFB,
E2F1/E2F3, NRF1, and ELK1 were responsible for the up-regulation of the cell
proliferation modules. IRF family and ETS family proteins were responsible for
the up-regulation of the immune response modules. Moreover, inhibition of the
PPARA signaling pathway may also play an important role in tumor progression. The
module without GO enrichment was found to be associated with a potential genomic 
gain in 8q21-23 in high-grade tumors. The 17-module signature of breast tumor
progression clustered patients into subgroups with significantly different
relapse-free survival times. Namely, patients with lower cell proliferation and
higher cell adhesion levels had significantly lower risk of recurrence, both for 
all patients (p = 0.004) and for those with grade 2 tumors (p = 0.017).
CONCLUSIONS: The ICE algorithm is effective in identifying relatively independent
co-expression modules from gene co-expression networks and the module-based
approach illustrated in this study provides a robust, interpretable, and
mechanistic characterization of transcriptional changes.

DOI: 10.1186/1752-0509-4-74 
PMCID: PMC2902438
PMID: 20507583  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Genome Biol. 2010;11(5):R53. doi: 10.1186/gb-2010-11-5-r53. Epub 2010 May 19.

A human functional protein interaction network and its application to cancer data
analysis.

Wu G(1), Feng X, Stein L.

Author information: 
(1)Ontario Institute for Cancer Research, MaRS Centre, South Tower, 101 College
Street, Suite 800, Toronto, ON M5G 0A3, Canada. guanmingwu@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: One challenge facing biologists is to tease out useful information
from massive data sets for further analysis. A pathway-based analysis may shed
light by projecting candidate genes onto protein functional relationship
networks. We are building such a pathway-based analysis system.
RESULTS: We have constructed a protein functional interaction network by
extending curated pathways with non-curated sources of information, including
protein-protein interactions, gene coexpression, protein domain interaction, Gene
Ontology (GO) annotations and text-mined protein interactions, which cover close 
to 50% of the human proteome. By applying this network to two glioblastoma
multiforme (GBM) data sets and projecting cancer candidate genes onto the
network, we found that the majority of GBM candidate genes form a cluster and are
closer than expected by chance, and the majority of GBM samples have
sequence-altered genes in two network modules, one mainly comprising genes whose 
products are localized in the cytoplasm and plasma membrane, and another
comprising gene products in the nucleus. Both modules are highly enriched in
known oncogenes, tumor suppressors and genes involved in signal transduction.
Similar network patterns were also found in breast, colorectal and pancreatic
cancers.
CONCLUSIONS: We have built a highly reliable functional interaction network upon 
expert-curated pathways and applied this network to the analysis of two
genome-wide GBM and several other cancer data sets. The network patterns revealed
from our results suggest common mechanisms in the cancer biology. Our system
should provide a foundation for a network or pathway-based analysis platform for 
cancer and other diseases.

DOI: 10.1186/gb-2010-11-5-r53 
PMCID: PMC2898064
PMID: 20482850  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. BMC Cancer. 2010 May 11;10:192. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-10-192.

Interference with activator protein-2 transcription factors leads to induction of
apoptosis and an increase in chemo- and radiation-sensitivity in breast cancer
cells.

Thewes V(1), Orso F, Jäger R, Eckert D, Schäfer S, Kirfel G, Garbe S, Taverna D, 
Schorle H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Pathology, Institute of Pathology, University of
Bonn, Medical School, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Activator protein-2 (AP-2) transcription factors are critically
involved in a variety of fundamental cellular processes such as proliferation,
differentiation and apoptosis and have also been implicated in carcinogenesis.
Expression of the family members AP-2alpha and AP-2gamma is particularly well
documented in malignancies of the female breast. Despite increasing evaluation of
single AP-2 isoforms in mammary tumors the functional role of concerted
expression of multiple AP-2 isoforms in breast cancer remains to be elucidated.
AP-2 proteins can form homo- or heterodimers, and there is growing evidence that 
the net effect whether a cell will proliferate, undergo apoptosis or
differentiate is partly dependent on the balance between different AP-2 isoforms.
METHODS: We simultaneously interfered with all AP-2 isoforms expressed in
ErbB-2-positive murine N202.1A breast cancer cells by conditionally
over-expressing a dominant-negative AP-2 mutant.
RESULTS: We show that interference with AP-2 protein function lead to reduced
cell number, induced apoptosis and increased chemo- and radiation-sensitivity.
Analysis of global gene expression changes upon interference with AP-2 proteins
identified 139 modulated genes (90 up-regulated, 49 down-regulated) compared with
control cells. Gene Ontology (GO) investigations for these genes revealed Cell
Death and Cell Adhesion and Migration as the main functional categories including
25 and 12 genes, respectively. By using information obtained from Ingenuity
Pathway Analysis Systems we were able to present proven or potential connections 
between AP-2 regulated genes involved in cell death and response to chemo- and
radiation therapy, (i.e. Ctgf, Nrp1, Tnfaip3, Gsta3) and AP-2 and other main
apoptosis players and to create a unique network.
CONCLUSIONS: Expression of AP-2 transcription factors in breast cancer cells
supports proliferation and contributes to chemo- and radiation-resistance of
tumor cells by impairing the ability to induce apoptosis. Therefore, interference
with AP-2 function could increase the sensitivity of tumor cells towards
therapeutic intervention.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2407-10-192 
PMCID: PMC2890516
PMID: 20459791  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. J Biomed Inform. 2010 Jun;43(3):385-96. doi: 10.1016/j.jbi.2010.03.009. Epub 2010
Mar 27.

Protein interaction network underpins concordant prognosis among heterogeneous
breast cancer signatures.

Chen J(1), Sam L, Huang Y, Lee Y, Li J, Liu Y, Xing HR, Lussier YA.

Author information: 
(1)Sections of Hematology/Oncology, The University of Chicago Cancer Research
Center, The Ludwig Center for Metastasis Research, The University of Chicago,
Chicago, IL, USA.

Characterizing the biomolecular systems' properties underpinning prognosis
signatures derived from gene expression profiles remains a key clinical and
biological challenge. In breast cancer, while different "poor-prognosis" sets of 
genes have predicted patient survival outcome equally well in independent
cohorts, these prognostic signatures have surprisingly little genetic overlap. We
examine 10 such published expression-based signatures that are predictors or
distinct breast cancer phenotypes, uncover their mechanistic interconnectivity
through a protein-protein interaction network, and introduce a novel cross-"gene 
expression signature" analysis method using (i) domain knowledge to constrain
multiple comparisons in a mechanistically relevant single-gene network
interactions and (ii) scale-free permutation re-sampling to statistically control
for hubness (SPAN - Single Protein Analysis of Network with constant node degree 
per protein). At adjusted p-values<5%, 54-genes thus identified have a
significantly greater connectivity than those through meticulous permutation
re-sampling of the context-constrained network. More importantly, eight of 10
genetically non-overlapping signatures are connected through well-established
mechanisms of breast cancer oncogenesis and progression. Gene Ontology enrichment
studies demonstrate common markers of cell cycle regulation. Kaplan-Meier
analysis of three independent historical gene expression sets confirms this
network-signature's inherent ability to identify "poor outcome" in ER(+) patients
without the requirement of machine learning. We provide a novel demonstration
that genetically distinct prognosis signatures, developed from independent
clinical datasets, occupy overlapping prognostic space of breast cancer via
shared mechanisms that are mediated by genetically different yet mechanistically 
comparable interactions among proteins of differentially expressed genes in the
signatures. This is the first study employing a networks' approach to aggregate
established gene expression signatures in order to develop a
phenotype/pathway-based cancer roadmap with the potential for (i) novel drug
development applications and for (ii) facilitating the clinical deployment of
prognostic gene signatures with improved mechanistic understanding of biological 
processes and functions associated with gene expression changes.
http://www.lussierlab.org/publication/networksignature/.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbi.2010.03.009 
PMCID: PMC2878851
PMID: 20350617  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Clin Chem. 2010 May;56(5):848-55. doi: 10.1373/clinchem.2009.136283. Epub 2010
Mar 26.

Nipple aspirate fluid proteome of healthy females and patients with breast
cancer.

Pavlou MP(1), Kulasingam V, Sauter ER, Kliethermes B, Diamandis EP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Mount Sinai Hospital,
Toronto, ON, Canada.

BACKGROUND: The ductal/alveolar system of the female breast constantly secretes
and reabsorbs fluid in nonpregnant/nonlactating women. This fluid, referred to as
nipple aspirate fluid (NAF), can be obtained by a noninvasive procedure and it is
part of the microenvironment where more than 95% of breast cancers arise.
METHODS: Using an Orbitrap mass analyzer coupled to a linear ion trap, we
performed an in-depth proteomic analysis of NAF samples obtained from 3 healthy
individuals and 3 patients with breast cancer. Multiple fractionation methods
such as size-exclusion and anion-exchange chromatography were applied for protein
separation before mass spectrometric analysis.
RESULTS: We identified more than 800 unique proteins in total, generating the
most extensive NAF proteome thus far. Using gene ontology, we classified the
identified proteins by their subcellular localization and found that more than
50% were extracellular or plasma membrane proteins. By searching against the
Plasma Proteome Database, we confirmed that 40% of the proteins were also found
in the plasma. Unigene database searching for transcripts of the proteins not
found in the plasma revealed that the vast majority were expressed in the mammary
gland.
CONCLUSIONS: Our extensive proteome database for NAF may be helpful in the
identification of novel cancer biomarkers.

DOI: 10.1373/clinchem.2009.136283 
PMID: 20348408  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Lung Cancer. 2010 Dec;70(3):253-62. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2010.02.012. Epub 2010
Mar 24.

RBM5/H37 tumor suppressor, located at the lung cancer hot spot 3p21.3, alters
expression of genes involved in metastasis.

Oh JJ(1), Taschereau EO, Koegel AK, Ginther CL, Rotow JK, Isfahani KZ, Slamon DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, University of California at Los Angeles
School of Medicine, 10833 Le Conte Avenue, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.
julianaoh@mednet.ucla.edu

The RBM5/H37 gene is located at the most 'sought-after' tumor suppressor locus in
lung cancer, 3p21.3. This region of most frequent chromosomal deletion found at
the earliest stage in lung cancer development houses 19 genes, many of which may 
act together as a 'tumor suppressor group', representing one of the most
promising opportunities for development of new diagnostics/prognostics and
therapeutics for lung cancer as well as for many other types of cancers. For the 
past decade, we have demonstrated tumor suppressor function of RBM5 in vitro and 
in vivo involving cell cycle arrest and apoptosis, as well as loss of RBM5 mRNA
and protein expression in primary lung tumors. Here we report our latest data
suggesting that RBM5 may regulate inhibition of metastasis in lung cancer. We
performed cDNA microarray to identify global gene expression changes caused by
RBM5 gene knockdown. In order to identify "consensus" pathways consistently
deregulated by RBM5 loss irrespective of genetic background, the experiments were
repeated in three different lung cancer cell lines of varying RBM5 expression
levels, a normal lung epithelial cell line, and a normal breast epithelial cell
line. Both Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) and individual gene analysis
identified consistent, statistically significant gene expression changes common
to all five cell pairs examined. Genes involved in the functions of cell
adhesion, migration and motility, known to be important in the metastatic
process, were upregulated with RBM5-knockdown. These genes include Rac1,
β-catenin, collagen, laminin and the overall gene set of the gene ontology group 
"proteinaceous extracellular matrix". Among these, we have focused on Rac1 and
β-catenin which play essential roles in cell movement downstream of Wnt
signaling. We have confirmed increased protein expression of β-catenin and
increased protein activation of Rac1 with RBM5-knockdown. In addition, we found
that RBM5 protein expression loss in primary lung tumors is correlated with
increased lymph node metastasis in a small number of lung cancer patients. These 
data are corroborated by an independent report showing RBM5 as part of a 17-gene 
signature of metastasis in primary solid tumors. Taken together, the accumulated 
evidence suggests that RBM5 expression loss may increase the metastatic potential
of tumors. Further study is warranted to evaluate the potential clinical utility 
of RBM5 in lung cancer diagnostics, prognostics and therapeutics.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2010.02.012 
PMID: 20338664  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Cancer Biol Ther. 2010 May 15;9(10):809-18.

Modulation of the anti-cancer efficacy of microtubule-targeting agents by
cellular growth conditions.

Dorsey JF(1), Dowling ML, Kim M, Voong R, Solin LJ, Kao GD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology and Radiation Biology and Imaging Program,
Abramson Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Pennsylvania School of
Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Mitotic spindle-disrupting agents target and disrupt microtubule dynamics. These 
agents include clinically important chemotherapies, including taxanes (paclitaxel
(Taxol), docetaxel (Taxotere)) and vinca alkaloids (vincristine (Oncovin),
vinblastine). Taxanes are a standard component of treatment for many
malignancies, often in conjunction with other cytotoxic agents. However, the
optimal sequencing of these treatments and whether efficacy may be influenced by 
in vitro cellular growth conditions remain incompletely investigated. Yet such
preclinical investigations may guide clinical decision making. We therefore
studied the effect of cell density on rapid killing by paclitaxel and
vincristine. Breast, ovarian and prostate cancer cells were sensitive to rapid
killing by either agent when grown at low density, but were markedly resistant
when grown at high density, i.e. nearly confluent. The resistance of densely
growing cells to rapid killing by these drugs translated to increased clonogenic 
survival. Pretreatment of densely growing cancer cells with cisplatin followed by
paclitaxel, partially reversed the treatment resistance. Gene ontology
associations from microarray analyses of cells grown at low and high density,
suggested roles for membrane signal transduction and adhesion, but potentially
also DNA damage repair and metabolism. Taken together, the treatment resistance
at higher cell density may be associated with a lower proportion of active
cycling in cells growing at high density as well as transduction of survival
signals induced by increased cell-cell adhesion. Collectively these findings
suggest mechanisms by which growth conditions may contribute to resistance to
rapid killing by microtubule-disrupting drugs.


PMCID: PMC3621729
PMID: 20234172  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Proteomics. 2010 May;10(9):1847-60. doi: 10.1002/pmic.200900711.

Temporal proteomic analysis of IGF-1R signalling in MCF-7 breast adenocarcinoma
cells.

Murphy JP(1), Pinto DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, Canada.

Dysregulation of the insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor signalling network is 
implicated in tumour growth and resistance to chemotherapy. We explored proteomic
changes resulting from insulin-like growth factor 1 stimulation of MCF-7
adenocarcinoma cells as a function of time. Quantitative analysis using iTRAQ
reagents and 2-D LC-MS/MS analysis of three biological replicates resulted in the
identification of 899 proteins (p<or=0.05) with an estimated mean false-positive 
rate of 2.6%. Quantitative protein expression was obtained from 681 proteins.
Further analysis by supervised k-means clustering identified five temporal
clusters, which were submitted to the FuncAssociate server to assign
overrepresented gene ontology terms. Proteins associated with vesicle transport
were significantly overrepresented. We further analyzed our data set for proteins
showing temporal significance using the software, extraction and analysis of
differential gene expression, resulting in 20 significantly and temporally
changing proteins (p<or=0.1). These significant proteins play roles in, among
others, altered glucose metabolism (lactate dehydrogenase A and pyruvate kinase
M1/M2) and cellular stress (nascent polypeptide-associated complex subunit alpha 
and heat shock (HSC70) proteins). We used multiple reaction monitoring to
validate these interesting proteins and have revealed several differences in
relative peptide expression corresponding to protein isoforms and variants.

DOI: 10.1002/pmic.200900711 
PMID: 20213678  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Proteomics. 2010 Apr;10(7):1374-90. doi: 10.1002/pmic.200900380.

Quantitative proteomics study of breast cancer cell lines isolated from a single 
patient: discovery of TIMM17A as a marker for breast cancer.

Xu X(1), Qiao M, Zhang Y, Jiang Y, Wei P, Yao J, Gu B, Wang Y, Lu J, Wang Z, Tang
Z, Sun Y, Wu W, Shi Q.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Hospital/Cancer Institute, College of Life Sciences and Institutes of
Biomedical Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai, PR China.

The proteins involved in breast cancer initiation and progression are still
largely elusive. To gain insights into these processes, we conducted quantitative
proteomic analyses with 21T series of breast cell lines, which include a normal, 
primary tumor and a metastatic tumor that were isolated from a single patient.
Stable isotope labeling of amino acid in cell culture followed by LC-MS/MS
analysis was performed and deregulated proteins were identified using statistical
analysis. Gene ontology analysis revealed that proteins involved in metabolic
processes were the most deregulated in both tumorigenesis and metastasis.
Interaction network analysis indicated that ERBB2 signaling played a critical
role in tumorigenesis. In addition to known markers such as ERBB2 and E-cadherin,
novel markers, including BRP44L, MTHFD2 and TIMM17A, were found to be
overexpressed in 21T breast cancer cells and verified in additional breast cell
lines. mRNA expression analysis as well as immunohistochemistry analysis in
breast cancer tissues indicated that expression level of TIMM17A was directly
correlated with tumor progression, and survival analysis suggested that TIMM17A
was a powerful prognosis factor in breast cancer. More interestingly,
overexpression and siRNA knockdown experiments indicated an oncogenic activity of
TIMM17A in breast cancer. Our study provides a list of potential novel markers
for breast cancer tumorigenesis and metastasis using a unique cell model. Further
studies on TIMM17A as well as other markers on the list may reveal mechanisms
that result in more effective therapeutics for cancer treatment.

DOI: 10.1002/pmic.200900380 
PMID: 20198662  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Genes Cancer. 2010 Mar;1(3):251-71. doi: 10.1177/1947601910365896.

Differential protein expression profiles in estrogen receptor-positive and
-negative breast cancer tissues using label-free quantitative proteomics.

Rezaul K(1), Thumar JK, Lundgren DH, Eng JK, Claffey KP, Wilson L, Han DK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Center for Vascular Biology, University of
Connecticut School of Medicine, Farmington, CT, USA.

Identification of the proteins that are associated with estrogen receptor (ER)
status is a first step towards better understanding of the hormone-dependent
nature of breast carcinogenesis. Although a number of gene expression analyses
have been conducted, protein complement has not been systematically investigated 
to date. Because proteins are primary targets of therapeutic drugs, in this
study, we have attempted to identify proteomic signatures that demarcate
ER-positive and -negative breast cancers. Using highly enriched breast tumor
cells, replicate analyses from 3 ERα+ and 3 ERα- human breast tumors resulted in 
the identification of 2,995 unique proteins with ≥2 peptides. Among these, a
number of receptor tyrosine kinases and intracellular kinases that are abundantly
expressed in ERα+ and ERα- breast cancer tissues were identified. Further,
label-free quantitative proteome analysis revealed that 236 proteins were
differentially expressed in ERα+ and ERα- breast tumors. Among these, 141
proteins were selectively up-regulated in ERα+, and 95 proteins were selectively 
up-regulated in ERα- breast tumors. Comparison of differentially expressed
proteins with a breast cancer database revealed 98 among these have been
previously reported to be involved in breast cancer. By Gene Ontology molecular
function, dehydrogenase, reductase, cytoskeletal proteins, extracellular matrix, 
hydrolase, and lyase categories were significantly enriched in ERα+, whereas
selected calcium-binding protein, membrane traffic protein, and cytoskeletal
protein were enriched in ERα- breast tumors. Biological process and pathway
analysis revealed that up-regulated proteins of ERα+ were overrepresented by
proteins involved in amino acid metabolism, proteasome, and fatty acid
metabolism, while up-regulated proteins of ERα- were overrepresented by proteins 
involved in glycolysis pathway. The presence and relative abundance of 4 selected
differentially abundant proteins (liprin-α1, fascin, DAP5, and β-arrestin-1) were
quantified and validated by immunohistochemistry. In conclusion, unlike in vitro 
cell culture models, the in vivo signaling proteins and pathways that we have
identified directly from human breast cancer tissues may serve as relevant
therapeutic targets for the pharmacological intervention of breast cancer.

DOI: 10.1177/1947601910365896 
PMCID: PMC3092194
PMID: 21779449 


1. Mol Endocrinol. 2010 Apr;24(4):859-72. doi: 10.1210/me.2009-0499. Epub 2010 Feb
24.

Global characterization of transcriptional impact of the SRC-3 coregulator.

Lanz RB(1), Bulynko Y, Malovannaya A, Labhart P, Wang L, Li W, Qin J, Harper M,
O'Malley BW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

The nuclear receptor and bona fide oncogene, steroid receptor coactivator-3
(SRC-3, AIB1), acts as a master transcriptional regulator of breast cancer by
transducing growth signals via the estrogen receptor alpha (ER). In this resource
paper, we present the genome-wide localization analysis of SRC-3 chromatin
affinity sites in MCF-7 human breast cancer chromatin and compare the cis binding
sites to global cartographies for ER and FoxA1. By correlating their gene
proximal binding sites to integrated gene expression signatures, and in
combination with gene ontology analyses, we provide a functional classification
of estradiol-induced gene regulation that further highlights an intricate
transcriptional control of interdependent cellular pathways by SRC-3.
Furthermore, by presenting proteomics analyses of in vivo SRC-3- and
ER-associated proteins, we give strong evidence to support the idea that the
interpretative power of SRC-3 in estrogen signaling is mediated through the
formation of distinct, cell state-dependent protein complexes. Altogether, we
present the first approach in complementary comparative analyses that converges
results obtained by three discovery-driven methods (cistromics, transcriptomics, 
and proteomics) into testable hypotheses, thus providing a valuable resource for 
follow-up studies that further our understanding of estrogen signaling in human
diseases in general and breast cancer in particular.

DOI: 10.1210/me.2009-0499 
PMCID: PMC2852354
PMID: 20181721  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Comput Biol Med. 2010 Feb;40(2):159-67. doi: 10.1016/j.compbiomed.2009.11.012.
Epub 2009 Dec 31.

Detecting novel hypermethylated genes in breast cancer benefiting from feature
selection.

Lv J(1), Su J, Wang F, Qi Y, Liu H, Zhang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Harbin Medical University, China.

The aberrant hypermethylation of CpG islands in promoter regions of genes plays
an important role in the onset and progression of Breast cancer. Meanwhile, it is
highly associated with human genomic features. Two feature selection algorithms: 
t-test and CfsSubsetEval were used to obtain efficient feature subsets. We
discovered 14 significant feature subsets by CfsSubsetEval, which can distinguish
hypermethylated genes from control genes. As a result, 393 unconfirmed
hypermethylated genes in Breast cancer were prioritized. These genes were
assigned the hypermethylated scores and were supported by literature and Gene
Ontology enrichment. This paper suggests that the feature subsets could be served
as discriminating genomic markers to infer novel hypermethylated genes in cancer 
potentially.

2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.compbiomed.2009.11.012 
PMID: 20044084  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. J Immunol. 2010 Jan 15;184(2):702-12. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0902360. Epub 2009
Dec 16.

Gene expression analysis of macrophages that facilitate tumor invasion supports a
role for Wnt-signaling in mediating their activity in primary mammary tumors.

Ojalvo LS(1), Whittaker CA, Condeelis JS, Pollard JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Molecular Biology, Albert Einstein College of 
Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, USA.

The tumor microenvironment modifies the malignancy of tumors. In solid tumors,
this environment is populated by many macrophages that, in genetic studies that
depleted these cells from mouse models of breast cancer, were shown to promote
tumor progression to malignancy and increase metastatic potential. Mechanistic
studies showed that these tumor-promoting effects of macrophages are through the 
stimulation of tumor cell migration, invasion, intravasation, and enhancement of 
angiogenesis. Using an in vivo invasion assay, it was demonstrated that invasive 
carcinoma cells are a unique subpopulation of tumor cells whose invasion and
chemotaxis is dependent on the comigration of tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs)
with obligate reciprocal signaling through an epidermal growth factor-CSF-1
paracrine loop. In this study, these invasion-promoting macrophages were isolated
and subjected to analysis of their transcriptome in comparison with TAMs isolated
indiscriminately to function using established macrophage markers. Unsupervised
analysis of transcript patterns showed that the invasion-associated TAMs
represent a unique subpopulation of TAMs that, by gene ontology criteria, have
gene expression patterns related to tissue and organ development. Gene set
enrichment analysis showed that these macrophages are also specifically enriched 
for molecules involved in Wnt-signaling. Previously, it was shown that
macrophage-derived Wnt molecules promote vascular remodeling and that tumor cells
are highly motile and intravasate around perivascular TAM clusters. Taken
together, we conjecture that invasive TAMs link angiogenesis and tumor invasion
and that Wnt-signaling plays a role in mediating their activity.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.0902360 
PMCID: PMC3226722
PMID: 20018620  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2010 Feb;119(3):685-99. doi: 10.1007/s10549-009-0651-3.

Gene expression pathway analysis to predict response to neoadjuvant docetaxel and
capecitabine for breast cancer.

Korde LA(1), Lusa L, McShane L, Lebowitz PF, Lukes L, Camphausen K, Parker JS,
Swain SM, Hunter K, Zujewski JA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Oncology, Department of Medicine University of
Washington/Seattle Cancer Care Alliance, G3639, 825 Eastlake Ave, E, Seattle, WA 
98109, USA. lkorde@u.washington.edu

Neoadjuvant chemotherapy has been shown to be equivalent to post-operative
treatment for breast cancer, and allows for assessment of chemotherapy response. 
In a pilot trial of docetaxel (T) and capecitabine (X) neoadjuvant chemotherapy
for Stage II/III BC, we assessed correlation between baseline gene expression and
tumor response to treatment, and examined changes in gene expression associated
with treatment. Patients received four cycles of TX. Tumor tissue obtained from
Mammotome core biopsies pretreatment (BL) and post-cycle 1 (C1) of TX was FLash
frozen and stored at -70 degrees C until processing. Gene expression analysis
utilized Affymetrix HG-U133 Plus 2.0 GeneChip arrays. Statistical analysis was
performed using BRB Array Tools after RMA normalization. Gene ontology (GO)
pathway analysis used random variance t tests with a significance level of
P\0.005. For gene categories identified byGO pathway analysis as significant,
expression levels of individual genes within those pathways were compared between
classes using univariate t tests; those genes with significance level of P\0.05
were reported. PAM50 analyses were performed on tumor samples to investigate
biologic subtype and risk of relapse (ROR). Using GO pathway analysis, 39 gene
categories discriminated between responders and non-responders,most notably genes
involved in microtubule assembly and regulation. When comparing pre- and
post-chemotherapy specimens, we identified 71 differentially expressed gene
categories, including DNA repair and cell proliferation regulation. There were 45
GO pathways in which the change in expression after one cycle of chemotherapy was
significantly different among responders and nonresponders. The majority of tumor
samples fell into the basal like and luminal B categories. ROR scores decreased
in response to chemotherapy; this change was more evident in samples from
patients classified as responders by clinical criteria. GO pathway analysis
identified a number of gene categories pertinent to therapeutic response, and may
be an informative method for identifying genes important in response to
chemotherapy. Larger studies using the methods described here are necessary to
fully evaluate gene expression changes in response to chemotherapy.

DOI: 10.1007/s10549-009-0651-3 
PMID: 20012355  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Anal Bioanal Chem. 2009 Dec;395(8):2443-56. doi: 10.1007/s00216-009-3187-9. Epub 
2009 Oct 29.

Towards a proteome signature for invasive ductal breast carcinoma derived from
label-free nanoscale LC-MS protein expression profiling of tumorous and glandular
tissue.

Röwer C(1), Vissers JP, Koy C, Kipping M, Hecker M, Reimer T, Gerber B, Thiesen
HJ, Glocker MO.

Author information: 
(1)Proteome Center Rostock, University of Rostock, 18055, Rostock, Germany.

As more and more alternative treatments become available for breast carcinoma,
there is a need to stratify patients and individual molecular information seems
to be suitable for this purpose. In this study, we applied label-free protein
quantitation by nanoscale LC-MS and investigated whether this approach could be
used for defining a proteome signature for invasive ductal breast carcinoma.
Tissue samples from healthy breast and tumor were collected from three patients. 
Protein identifications were based on LC-MS peptide fragmentation data which were
obtained simultaneously to the quantitative information. Hereby, an invasive
ductal breast carcinoma proteome signature was generated which contains 60
protein entries. The on-column concentrations for osteoinductive factor,
vimentin, GAP-DH, and NDKA are provided as examples. These proteins represent
distinctive gene ontology groups of differentially expressed proteins and are
discussed as risk markers for primary tumor pathogenesis. The developed
methodology has been found well applicable in a clinical environment in which
standard operating procedures can be kept; a prerequisite for the definition of
molecular parameter sets that shall be capable for stratification of patients.

DOI: 10.1007/s00216-009-3187-9 
PMID: 19876624  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2010 Aug;122(3):699-710. doi: 10.1007/s10549-009-0600-1.
Epub 2009 Oct 27.

Genomic screening for genes upregulated by demethylation revealed novel targets
of epigenetic silencing in breast cancer.

Fujikane T(1), Nishikawa N, Toyota M, Suzuki H, Nojima M, Maruyama R, Ashida M,
Ohe-Toyota M, Kai M, Nishidate T, Sasaki Y, Ohmura T, Hirata K, Tokino T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Cancer Research Institute, Sapporo Medical
University, Sapporo 060-8556, Japan.

Breast cancer arises through the accumulation of multiple genetic alterations and
epigenetic changes such as methylation, which silences gene expression in a
variety of cancers. In the present study, we applied genomic screening to
identify genes upregulated by the demethylating agent 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine
(DAC) in a human breast cancer cell line (MCF7). We identified 288 genes
upregulated and 29 genes downregulated more than fivefold after treatment with
DAC, and gene ontology analyses revealed the genes to be involved in immune
responses, apoptosis, and cell differentiation. In addition, real-time PCR
analysis of ten genes silenced in MCF7 cells confirmed that they are upregulated 
by DAC, while bisulfite-pyrosequencing analysis confirmed that nine of those
genes were silenced by methylation. We also found that treating MCF7 cells with
DAC restored induction of DFNA5 by p53, as well as by two other p53 family genes,
p63gamma and p73beta. Introduction of NTN4 into MCF7 cells suppressed cell
growth, indicating that NTN4 has tumor suppressive activity. In primary breast
cancers, we detected cancer-specific methylation of NTN4, PGP9.5, and DKK3,
suggesting that methylation of these genes could be useful markers for diagnosis 
of breast cancer. Thus, DNA methylation appears to be a common event in breast
cancer, and the genes silenced by methylation could be useful targets for both
diagnosis and therapy.

DOI: 10.1007/s10549-009-0600-1 
PMID: 19859801  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. BMC Bioinformatics. 2009 Oct 15;10 Suppl 12:S8. doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-10-S12-S8.

Identification of functionally related genes using data mining and data
integration: a breast cancer case study.

Mosca E(1), Bertoli G, Piscitelli E, Vilardo L, Reinbold RA, Zucchi I, Milanesi
L.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto Tecnologie Biomediche, Consiglio Nazionale Ricerche, Via Fratelli
Cervi 93, Segrate (MI), Italy. ettore.mosca@itb.cnr.it

BACKGROUND: The identification of the organisation and dynamics of molecular
pathways is crucial for the understanding of cell function. In order to
reconstruct the molecular pathways in which a gene of interest is involved in
regulating a cell, it is important to identify the set of genes to which it
interacts with to determine cell function. In this context, the mining and the
integration of a large amount of publicly available data, regarding the
transcriptome and the proteome states of a cell, are a useful resource to
complement biological research.
RESULTS: We describe an approach for the identification of genes that interact
with each other to regulate cell function. The strategy relies on the analysis of
gene expression profile similarity, considering large datasets of expression
data. During the similarity evaluation, the methodology determines the most
significant subset of samples in which the evaluated genes are highly correlated.
Hence, the strategy enables the exclusion of samples that are not relevant for
each gene pair analysed. This feature is important when considering a large set
of samples characterised by heterogeneous experimental conditions where different
pools of biological processes can be active across the samples. The putative
partners of the studied gene are then further characterised, analysing the
distribution of the Gene Ontology terms and integrating the protein-protein
interaction (PPI) data. The strategy was applied for the analysis of the
functional relationships of a gene of known function, Pyruvate Kinase, and for
the prediction of functional partners of the human transcription factor TBX3. In 
both cases the analysis was done on a dataset composed by breast primary tumour
expression data derived from the literature. Integration and analysis of PPI data
confirmed the prediction of the methodology, since the genes identified to be
functionally related were associated to proteins close in the PPI network. Two
genes among the predicted putative partners of TBX3 (GLI3 and GATA3) were
confirmed by in vivo binding assays (crosslinking immunoprecipitation, X-ChIP) in
which the putative DNA enhancer sequence sites of GATA3 and GLI3 were found to be
bound by the Tbx3 protein.
CONCLUSION: The presented strategy is demonstrated to be an effective approach to
identify genes that establish functional relationships. The methodology
identifies and characterises genes with a similar expression profile, through
data mining and integrating data from publicly available resources, to contribute
to a better understanding of gene regulation and cell function. The prediction of
the TBX3 target genes GLI3 and GATA3 was experimentally confirmed.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2105-10-S12-S8 
PMCID: PMC2762073
PMID: 19828084  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. BMC Bioinformatics. 2009 Oct 15;10 Suppl 12:S10. doi:
10.1186/1471-2105-10-S12-S10.

Survival Online: a web-based service for the analysis of correlations between
gene expression and clinical and follow-up data.

Corradi L(1), Mirisola V, Porro I, Torterolo L, Fato M, Romano P, Pfeffer U.

Author information: 
(1)University of Genoa, Department of Communication, Computer and System
Sciences, Viale Causa 13, Genoa, Italy. luca.corradi@unige.it

BACKGROUND: Complex microarray gene expression datasets can be used for many
independent analyses and are particularly interesting for the validation of
potential biomarkers and multi-gene classifiers. This article presents a novel
method to perform correlations between microarray gene expression data and
clinico-pathological data through a combination of available and newly developed 
processing tools.
RESULTS: We developed Survival Online (available at
http://ada.dist.unige.it:8080/enginframe/bioinf/bioinf.xml), a Web-based system
that allows for the analysis of Affymetrix GeneChip microarrays by using a
parallel version of dChip. The user is first enabled to select pre-loaded
datasets or single samples thereof, as well as single genes or lists of genes.
Expression values of selected genes are then correlated with sample annotation
data by uni- or multi-variate Cox regression and survival analyses. The system
was tested using publicly available breast cancer datasets and GO (Gene Ontology)
derived gene lists or single genes for survival analyses.
CONCLUSION: The system can be used by bio-medical researchers without specific
computation skills to validate potential biomarkers or multi-gene classifiers.
The design of the service, the parallelization of pre-processing tasks and the
implementation on an HPC (High Performance Computing) environment make this
system a useful tool for validation on several independent datasets.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2105-10-S12-S10 
PMCID: PMC2762059
PMID: 19828070  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2010 Feb 28;118(4-5):273-6. doi:
10.1016/j.jsbmb.2009.10.005. Epub 2009 Oct 27.

Clinical, pathological, proliferative and molecular responses associated with
neoadjuvant aromatase inhibitor treatment in breast cancer.

Miller WR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Breast Unit Research Group, University of Edinburgh, Western General Hospital,
Edinburgh, United Kingdom. w.r.miller@ed.ac.uk

Neoadjuvant treatment provides an exceptional setting in which to monitor
clinical, pathological, proliferative and molecular responses to aromatase
inhibitors. Sequential measurements of the primary tumour provide an accurate
assessment of clinical changes and the relatively easy access to the tumour
within the breast means that biopsies are available for histological and
molecular measurements before and during treatment. Large randomised trials (P024
and IMPACT) together with informative non-randomised studies have demonstrated
clinical responses to third generation aromatase inhibitors in 40-70% of
ER-positive tumours, rates generally significantly higher than observed with
tamoxifen. Pathological responses in terms of reduced cellularity/increased
fibrosis are also seen in 65-75% of cases. Whilst these are more often seen in
clinically responding tumours, the correlation between clinical and pathological 
response is not absolute. A marked feature of treatment with third generation
inhibitors is a reduction in cellular proliferation. Using Ki67 as a marker, this
may be observed as early as 10-14 days into treatment. Reduction in proliferation
with treatment may be seen in both clinically responding and non-responding
tumours, although incidence and degree of effect are higher in responding cases. 
Aromatase inhibitor treatment frequently fails to reduce proliferation in tumours
over-expressing HER-2. In terms of molecular events, aromatase inhibitor
treatment is associated with changes in expression of genes classically
associated with oestrogen regulation (KIAA0101, ZWINT, IRS1 and TFF1) and cell
cycle progression, most notably mitotic phase proteins (CDC2, CCNB1 and CKS2).
Changes occur both in clinically responding and non-responding tumours. Although 
expression of no individual gene correlates absolutely with response status,
expression signatures can be produced which distinguish between responding and
non-responding tumours. In terms of gene ontology, terms relating to
macro-molecular biosynthesis, translation and structural components of ribosomes 
are significantly enriched. Finally, molecular signatures can be used to
illustrate the relative homogeneity of responding tumours and the disparate
nature of non-responding tumours suggesting multiple and diverse pathways
associated with resistance.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jsbmb.2009.10.005 
PMID: 19837160  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Endocrine. 2009 Oct;36(2):224-32. doi: 10.1007/s12020-009-9233-8. Epub 2009 Aug
13.

Microarray analysis of altered gene expression in ERbeta-overexpressing HEK293
cells.

Zhao C(1), Putnik M, Gustafsson JA, Dahlman-Wright K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences and Nutrition, NOVUM, Karolinska Institutet, 141 57,
Huddinge, Sweden. chunyan.zhao@ki.se

Estrogen receptors (ERs), ERalpha and ERbeta, mediate estrogen actions in a broad
range of target tissues. With the introduction of microarray techniques, a
significant understanding has been gained regarding the interplay between the
ERalpha and ERbeta in breast cancer cell lines. To gain a more comprehensive
understanding of ERbeta-dependent gene regulation independent of ERalpha, we
performed microarray analysis on HEK293/mock and HEK293/ERbeta cells. A total of 
332 genes was identified as ERbeta-upregulated genes and 210 identified as
ERbeta-downregulated genes. ERbeta-induced and ERbeta-repressed genes were
involved in cell-cell signaling, morphogenesis, and cell proliferation. The
ERbeta repressive effect on genes related to proliferation was further studied by
proliferation assays, where ERbeta expression resulted in a significant decrease 
in cell proliferation. To identify primary ERbeta target genes, we examined a
number of ERbeta-regulated genes using chromatin immunoprecipitation assays for
regions bound by ERbeta. Our results showed that ERbeta recruitment was
significant to regions associated with 12 genes (IL1RAP, TMSB4X, COLEC12, ENPP2, 
KLRC1, RERG, RGS16, TNNT2, CYR61, FER1L3, FAM108A1, and CYP4X1), suggesting that 
these genes are likely to be ERbeta primary target genes. This study has provided
novel information on the gene regulatory function of ERbeta independent of
ERalpha and identified a number of ERbeta primary target genes. The results of
Gene Ontology analysis and proliferation assays are consistent with an
antiproliferative role of ERbeta independent of ERalpha.

DOI: 10.1007/s12020-009-9233-8 
PMID: 19680825  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Clin Cancer Res. 2009 Jun 15;15(12):3979-89. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-08-1899. 
Epub 2009 Jun 9.

Global gene expression analysis of reactive stroma in prostate cancer.

Dakhova O(1), Ozen M, Creighton CJ, Li R, Ayala G, Rowley D, Ittmann M.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Patholog, Baylor College of Medicine, and Michael E DeBakey
Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Comment in
    Future Oncol. 2009 Oct;5(8):1231-5.

PURPOSE: Marked reactive stroma formation, designated as grade 3 reactive stroma,
is associated with poor outcome in clinically localized prostate cancer. To
understand the biological processes and signaling mechanisms underlying the
formation of such reactive stroma, we carried out microarray gene expression
analysis of laser-captured reactive stroma and matched normal stroma.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Seventeen cases of reactive stroma grade 3 cancer were used 
to laser-capture tumor and normal stroma. Expression analysis was carried out
using Agilent 44K arrays. Up-regulation of selected genes was confirmed by
quantitative reverse transcription-PCR. Expression data was analyzed to identify 
significantly up- and down-regulated genes, and gene ontology analysis was used
to define pathways altered in reactive stroma.
RESULTS: A total of 544 unique genes were significantly higher in the reactive
stroma and 606 unique genes were lower. Gene ontology analysis revealed
significant alterations in a number of novel processes in prostate cancer
reactive stroma, including neurogenesis, axonogenesis, and the DNA damage/repair 
pathways, as well as evidence of increases in stem cells in prostate cancer
reactive stroma.
CONCLUSIONS: Formation of reactive stroma in prostate cancer is a dynamic process
characterized by significant alterations in growth factor and signal transduction
pathways and formation of new structures, including nerves and axons.

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-08-1899 
PMCID: PMC2734921
PMID: 19509179  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Front Biosci (Schol Ed). 2009 Jun 1;1:216-25.

Tumor endothelium is characterized by a matrix remodeling signature.

van Beijnum JR(1), Petersen K, Griffioen AW.

Author information: 
(1)Angiogenesis Laboratory, Department of Pathology, GROW - School for Oncology
and Developmental Biology, Department of Pathology, Maastricht University and
University Hospital Maastricht, PO box 5800, 6202AZ Maastricht, The Netherlands.

Endothelial cells (EC) are attractive targets for therapeutic interference in
diseases that are dependent on the formation of novel blood vessels, such as
cancer. EC are readily accessible via the blood stream and are considered to be
genetically stable, thus enabling efficient and effective drug delivery. However,
for targeting of EC in blood vessels of the disease tissue, specific markers are 
needed. Though various studies have focused on the differences in gene expression
in endothelial cells in different in vitro model systems, only few studies have
focused on gene expression in EC derived from tumor tissues and corresponding
normal tissues. Here, we review the gene expression data sets of EC isolated from
tumors of the colon, breast, brain and ovaries. Gene ontology analysis reveals
enrichment for genes involved in extracellular matrix turnover and adhesion.
Several genes, including collagens 4A1, 4A2 and 1A1, SPARC, THY1 and MMP9 are
overexpressed in the endothelium of more than one tumor type, whereas plexin
domain containing 1 (PLXDC1), previously known as TEM7, is overexpressed in EC of
all four tumor types.


PMID: 19482697  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Med Oncol. 2010 Jun;27(2):406-15. doi: 10.1007/s12032-009-9225-9. Epub 2009 May
2.

Systematic analysis of microRNA involved in resistance of the MCF-7 human breast 
cancer cell to doxorubicin.

Chen GQ(1), Zhao ZW, Zhou HY, Liu YJ, Yang HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Anatomy, West China School of Preclinical and Forensic
Medicine, Sichuan University, Renmin South Road No 17, Chengdu, China.

Multidrug resistance remains a major clinical obstacle to successful treatment of
breast cancer and leads to poor prognosis for the patients. Recently studies have
shown that microRNAs play an important role in breast cancer cell resistance to
chemotherapeutic agents. In this study, microRNA expression profiles of
MCF-7/AdrVp and MCF-7 were analyzed using microarray and the results were
confirmed by real-time RT-polymerase chain reaction. Gene Ontology (GO) and
pathways mapping tools were employed to analyse systemically the biological
processes and signaling pathways affected by differential expression microRNAs.
Here, we showed that 181 human microRNAs were differentially expressed between
two cell lines. Compared to MCF-7 cells, there were 16 microRNAs down-regulated
and 165 microRNAs up-regulated in MCF-7/AdrVp. Western blot confirmed the
correlation between specific microRNA expression and corresponding changes in
protein levels of their targets, specifically those that have a documented role
in cancer drug resistance. Furthermore, we validated that signaling pathway
highlighted in the study was involved in drug resistance. These results indicated
that breast cancer cell resistant to chemotherapy was associated with a group of 
microRNAs. GO and pathway mapping are valid and effective approach to analyse the
function of microRNAs and the results could be a guideline for further
investigation.

DOI: 10.1007/s12032-009-9225-9 
PMID: 19412672  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. BMC Genomics. 2009 Apr 27;10:197. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-10-197.

Gene set internal coherence in the context of functional profiling.

Montaner D(1), Minguez P, Al-Shahrour F, Dopazo J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioinformatics and Genomics, Centro de Investigación Príncipe
Felipe (CIPF), Valencia, Spain. dmontaner@cipf.es

BACKGROUND: Functional profiling methods have been extensively used in the
context of high-throughput experiments and, in particular, in microarray data
analysis. Such methods use available biological information to define different
types of functional gene modules (e.g. gene ontology -GO-, KEGG pathways, etc.)
whose representation in a pre-defined list of genes is further studied. In the
most popular type of microarray experimental designs (e.g. up- or down-regulated 
genes, clusters of co-expressing genes, etc.) or in other genomic experiments
(e.g. Chip-on-chip, epigenomics, etc.) these lists are composed by genes with a
high degree of co-expression. Therefore, an implicit assumption in the
application of functional profiling methods within this context is that the genes
corresponding to the modules tested are effectively defining sets of
co-expressing genes. Nevertheless not all the functional modules are biologically
coherent entities in terms of co-expression, which will eventually hinder its
detection with conventional methods of functional enrichment.
RESULTS: Using a large collection of microarray data we have carried out a
detailed survey of internal correlation in GO terms and KEGG pathways, providing 
a coherence index to be used for measuring functional module co-regulation. An
unexpected low level of internal correlation was found among the modules studied.
Only around 30% of the modules defined by GO terms and 57% of the modules defined
by KEGG pathways display an internal correlation higher than the expected by
chance.This information on the internal correlation of the genes within the
functional modules can be used in the context of a logistic regression model in a
simple way to improve their detection in gene expression experiments.
CONCLUSION: For the first time, an exhaustive study on the internal co-expression
of the most popular functional categories has been carried out. Interestingly,
the real level of coexpression within many of them is lower than expected (or
even inexistent), which will preclude its detection by means of most conventional
functional profiling methods. If the gene-to-function correlation information is 
used in functional profiling methods, the results obtained improve the ones
obtained by conventional enrichment methods.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2164-10-197 
PMCID: PMC2680416
PMID: 19397819  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. PLoS One. 2009;4(2):e4531. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0004531. Epub 2009 Feb 19.

Differences in the tumor microenvironment between African-American and
European-American breast cancer patients.

Martin DN(1), Boersma BJ, Yi M, Reimers M, Howe TM, Yfantis HG, Tsai YC, Williams
EH, Lee DH, Stephens RM, Weissman AM, Ambs S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Human Carcinogenesis, Center of Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of
America.

BACKGROUND: African-American breast cancer patients experience higher mortality
rates than European-American patients despite having a lower incidence of the
disease. We tested the hypothesis that intrinsic differences in the tumor biology
may contribute to this cancer health disparity.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Using laser capture microdissection, we examined genome-wide
mRNA expression specific to tumor epithelium and tumor stroma in 18
African-American and 17 European-American patients. Numerous genes were
differentially expressed between these two patient groups and a two-gene
signature in the tumor epithelium distinguished between them. To identify the
biological processes in tumors that are different by race/ethnicity, Gene
Ontology and disease association analyses were performed. Several biological
processes were identified which may contribute to enhanced disease aggressiveness
in African-American patients, including angiogenesis and chemotaxis.
African-American tumors also contained a prominent interferon signature. The role
of angiogenesis in the tumor biology of African-Americans was further
investigated by examining the extent of vascularization and macrophage
infiltration in an expanded set of 248 breast tumors. Immunohistochemistry
revealed that microvessel density and macrophage infiltration is higher in tumors
of African-Americans than in tumors of European-Americans. Lastly, using an in
silico approach, we explored the potential of tailored treatment options for
African-American patients based on their gene expression profile. This
exploratory approach generated lists of therapeutics that may have specific
antagonistic activity against tumors of African-American patients, e.g.,
sirolimus, resveratrol, and chlorpromazine in estrogen receptor-negative tumors.
CONCLUSIONS: The gene expression profiles of breast tumors indicate that
differences in tumor biology may exist between African-American and
European-American patients beyond the knowledge of current markers. Notably,
pathways related to tumor angiogenesis and chemotaxis could be functionally
different in these two patient groups.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0004531 
PMCID: PMC2638012
PMID: 19225562  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Breast Cancer Res. 2009;11(1):R7. doi: 10.1186/bcr2222. Epub 2009 Feb 2.

Gene expression profiling of the tumor microenvironment during breast cancer
progression.

Ma XJ(1), Dahiya S, Richardson E, Erlander M, Sgroi DC.

Author information: 
(1)bioTheranostics, Inc, 11025 Roselle Street, San Diego, CA 92121, USA.
xma@aviaradx.com

Comment in
    Breast Cancer Res. 2009;11(2):102.

INTRODUCTION: The importance of the tumor microenvironment in breast cancer has
been increasingly recognized. Critical molecular changes in the tumor stroma
accompanying cancer progression, however, remain largely unknown. We conducted a 
comparative analysis of global gene expression changes in the stromal and
epithelial compartments during breast cancer progression from normal to
preinvasive to invasive ductal carcinoma.
METHODS: We combined laser capture microdissection and gene expression
microarrays to analyze 14 patient-matched normal epithelium, normal stroma, tumor
epithelium and tumor-associated stroma specimens. Differential gene expression
and gene ontology analyses were performed.
RESULTS: Tumor-associated stroma undergoes extensive gene expression changes
during cancer progression, to a similar extent as that seen in the malignant
epithelium. Highly upregulated genes in the tumor-associated stroma include
constituents of the extracellular matrix and matrix metalloproteases, and
cell-cycle-related genes. Decreased expression of cytoplasmic ribosomal proteins 
and increased expression of mitochondrial ribosomal proteins were observed in
both the tumor epithelium and the stroma. The transition from preinvasive to
invasive growth was accompanied by increased expression of several matrix
metalloproteases (MMP2, MMP11 and MMP14). Furthermore, as observed in malignant
epithelium, a gene expression signature of histological tumor grade also exists
in the stroma, with high-grade tumors associated with increased expression of
genes involved in immune response.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that the tumor microenvironment participates in 
tumorigenesis even before tumor cells invade into stroma, and that it may play
important roles in the transition from preinvasive to invasive growth. The immune
cells in the tumor stroma may be exploited by the malignant epithelial cells in
high-grade tumors for aggressive invasive growth.

DOI: 10.1186/bcr2222 
PMCID: PMC2687710
PMID: 19187537  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. J Comput Biol. 2009 Feb;16(2):265-78. doi: 10.1089/cmb.2008.12TT.

Integrating biological knowledge with gene expression profiles for survival
prediction of cancer.

Chen X(1), Wang L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Quantitative Health Sciences, The Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland,
OH 44195, USA. chenx3@ccf.org

Due to the large variability in survival times between cancer patients and the
plethora of genes on microarrays unrelated to outcome, building accurate
prediction models that are easy to interpret remains a challenge. In this paper, 
we propose a general strategy for improving performance and interpretability of
prediction models by integrating gene expression data with prior biological
knowledge. First, we link gene identifiers in expression dataset with gene
annotation databases such as Gene Ontology (GO). Then we construct "supergenes"
for each gene category by summarizing information from genes related to outcome
using a modified principal component analysis (PCA) method. Finally, instead of
using genes as predictors, we use these supergenes representing information from 
each gene category as predictors to predict survival outcome. In addition to
identifying gene categories associated with outcome, the proposed approach also
carries out additional within-category selection to select important genes within
each gene set. We show, using two real breast cancer microarray datasets, that
the prediction models constructed based on gene sets (or pathway) information
outperform the prediction models based on expression values of single genes, with
improved prediction accuracy and interpretability.

DOI: 10.1089/cmb.2008.12TT 
PMCID: PMC3198940
PMID: 19183004  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. BMC Med Genomics. 2008 Dec 18;1:62. doi: 10.1186/1755-8794-1-62.

Biological processes, properties and molecular wiring diagrams of candidate
low-penetrance breast cancer susceptibility genes.

Bonifaci N(1), Berenguer A, Díez J, Reina O, Medina I, Dopazo J, Moreno V, Pujana
MA.

Author information: 
(1)Bioinformatics and Biostatistics Unit, and Translational Research Laboratory, 
Catalan Institute of Oncology, Bellvitge Biomedical Research Institute (IDIBELL),
L'Hospitalet, Barcelona, Spain. nbonifaci@iconcologia.net

BACKGROUND: Recent advances in whole-genome association studies (WGASs) for human
cancer risk are beginning to provide the part lists of low-penetrance
susceptibility genes. However, statistical analysis in these studies is
complicated by the vast number of genetic variants examined and the weak effects 
observed, as a result of which constraints must be incorporated into the study
design and analytical approach. In this scenario, biological attributes beyond
the adjusted statistics generally receive little attention and, more importantly,
the fundamental biological characteristics of low-penetrance susceptibility genes
have yet to be determined.
METHODS: We applied an integrative approach for identifying candidate
low-penetrance breast cancer susceptibility genes, their characteristics and
molecular networks through the analysis of diverse sources of biological
evidence.
RESULTS: First, examination of the distribution of Gene Ontology terms in ordered
WGAS results identified asymmetrical distribution of Cell Communication and Cell 
Death processes linked to risk. Second, analysis of 11 different types of
molecular or functional relationships in genomic and proteomic data sets defined 
the "omic" properties of candidate genes: i/ differential expression in tumors
relative to normal tissue; ii/ somatic genomic copy number changes correlating
with gene expression levels; iii/ differentially expressed across age at
diagnosis; and iv/ expression changes after BRCA1 perturbation. Finally, network 
modeling of the effects of variants on germline gene expression showed higher
connectivity than expected by chance between novel candidates and with known
susceptibility genes, which supports functional relationships and provides
mechanistic hypotheses of risk.
CONCLUSION: This study proposes that cell communication and cell death are major 
biological processes perturbed in risk of breast cancer conferred by
low-penetrance variants, and defines the common omic properties, molecular
interactions and possible functional effects of candidate genes and proteins.

DOI: 10.1186/1755-8794-1-62 
PMCID: PMC2628924
PMID: 19094230 


1. Infect Genet Evol. 2009 May;9(3):328-36. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2008.09.009. Epub 
2008 Oct 17.

Application of Multi-SOM clustering approach to macrophage gene expression
analysis.

Ghouila A(1), Yahia SB, Malouche D, Jmel H, Laouini D, Guerfali FZ, Abdelhak S.

Author information: 
(1)Research Unit on Molecular Investigation of Genetic Orphan Diseases, Institut 
Pasteur de Tunis, 13 Place Pasteur, BP 74, Tunis Belvédère 1002, Tunisia.
amel.ghouila@gmail.com

The production of increasingly reliable and accessible gene expression data has
stimulated the development of computational tools to interpret such data and to
organize them efficiently. The clustering techniques are largely recognized as
useful exploratory tools for gene expression data analysis. Genes that show
similar expression patterns over a wide range of experimental conditions can be
clustered together. This relies on the hypothesis that genes that belong to the
same cluster are coregulated and involved in related functions. Nevertheless,
clustering algorithms still show limits, particularly for the estimation of the
number of clusters and the interpretation of hierarchical dendrogram, which may
significantly influence the outputs of the analysis process. We propose here a
multi level SOM based clustering algorithm named Multi-SOM. Through the use of
clustering validity indices, Multi-SOM overcomes the problem of the estimation of
clusters number. To test the validity of the proposed clustering algorithm, we
first tested it on supervised training data sets. Results were evaluated by
computing the number of misclassified samples. We have then used Multi-SOM for
the analysis of macrophage gene expression data generated in vitro from the same 
individual blood infected with 5 different pathogens. This analysis led to the
identification of sets of tightly coregulated genes across different pathogens.
Gene Ontology tools were then used to estimate the biological significance of the
clustering, which showed that the obtained clusters are coherent and biologically
significant.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2008.09.009 
PMID: 18992849  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. PLoS One. 2008;3(11):e3661. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0003661. Epub 2008 Nov 6.

Integrative genomic data mining for discovery of potential blood-borne biomarkers
for early diagnosis of cancer.

Yang Y(1), Pospisil P, Iyer LK, Adelstein SJ, Kassis AI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, Harvard Medical School, Harvard University, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA.

Erratum in
    PLoS ONE. 2009;4(1). doi:
10.1371/annotation/9fbf88b3-5041-4a5e-b569-bc6c0e5f9c29. Pospisil, Pavel [added].

BACKGROUND: With the arrival of the postgenomic era, there is increasing interest
in the discovery of biomarkers for the accurate diagnosis, prognosis, and early
detection of cancer. Blood-borne cancer markers are favored by clinicians,
because blood samples can be obtained and analyzed with relative ease. We have
used a combined mining strategy based on an integrated cancer microarray
platform, Oncomine, and the biomarker module of the Ingenuity Pathways Analysis
(IPA) program to identify potential blood-based markers for six common human
cancer types.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: In the Oncomine platform, the genes overexpressed
in cancer tissues relative to their corresponding normal tissues were filtered by
Gene Ontology keywords, with the extracellular environment stipulated and a
corrected Q value (false discovery rate) cut-off implemented. The identified
genes were imported to the IPA biomarker module to separate out those genes
encoding putative secreted or cell-surface proteins as blood-borne
(blood/serum/plasma) cancer markers. The filtered potential indicators were
ranked and prioritized according to normalized absolute Student t values. The
retrieval of numerous marker genes that are already clinically useful or under
active investigation confirmed the effectiveness of our mining strategy. To
identify the biomarkers that are unique for each cancer type, the upregulated
marker genes that are in common between each two tumor types across the six human
tumors were also analyzed by the IPA biomarker comparison function.
CONCLUSION/SIGNIFICANCE: The upregulated marker genes shared among the six cancer
types may serve as a molecular tool to complement histopathologic examination,
and the combination of the commonly upregulated and unique biomarkers may serve
as differentiating markers for a specific cancer. This approach will be
increasingly useful to discover diagnostic signatures as the mass of microarray
data continues to grow in the 'omics' era.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0003661 
PMCID: PMC2575235
PMID: 18987750  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Bioinformatics. 2008 Dec 15;24(24):2894-900. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btn553. 
Epub 2008 Oct 30.

Investigating the correspondence between transcriptomic and proteomic expression 
profiles using coupled cluster models.

Rogers S(1), Girolami M, Kolch W, Waters KM, Liu T, Thrall B, Wiley HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computing Science, University of Glasgow, Glasgow G128QQ, UK.
srogers@dcs.gla.ac.uk

MOTIVATION: Modern transcriptomics and proteomics enable us to survey the
expression of RNAs and proteins at large scales. While these data are usually
generated and analyzed separately, there is an increasing interest in comparing
and co-analyzing transcriptome and proteome expression data. A major open
question is whether transcriptome and proteome expression is linked and how it is
coordinated.
RESULTS: Here we have developed a probabilistic clustering model that permits
analysis of the links between transcriptomic and proteomic profiles in a sensible
and flexible manner. Our coupled mixture model defines a prior probability
distribution over the component to which a protein profile should be assigned
conditioned on which component the associated mRNA profile belongs to. We apply
this approach to a large dataset of quantitative transcriptomic and proteomic
expression data obtained from a human breast epithelial cell line (HMEC). The
results reveal a complex relationship between transcriptome and proteome with
most mRNA clusters linked to at least two protein clusters, and vice versa. A
more detailed analysis incorporating information on gene function from the Gene
Ontology database shows that a high correlation of mRNA and protein expression is
limited to the components of some molecular machines, such as the ribosome, cell 
adhesion complexes and the TCP-1 chaperonin involved in protein folding.
AVAILABILITY: Matlab code is available from the authors on request.

DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btn553 
PMCID: PMC4141638
PMID: 18974169  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Proteome Sci. 2008 Oct 24;6:30. doi: 10.1186/1477-5956-6-30.

Sample prep for proteomics of breast cancer: proteomics and gene ontology reveal 
dramatic differences in protein solubilization preferences of
radioimmunoprecipitation assay and urea lysis buffers.

Ngoka LC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond,
23284-2006, USA. lngoka@vcu.edu

BACKGROUND: An important step in the proteomics of solid tumors, including breast
cancer, consists of efficiently extracting most of proteins in the tumor
specimen. For this purpose, Radio-Immunoprecipitation Assay (RIPA) buffer is
widely employed. RIPA buffer's rapid and highly efficient cell lysis and good
solubilization of a wide range of proteins is further augmented by its
compatibility with protease and phosphatase inhibitors, ability to minimize
non-specific protein binding leading to a lower background in
immunoprecipitation, and its suitability for protein quantitation.
RESULTS: In this work, the insoluble matter left after RIPA buffer extraction of 
proteins from breast tumors are subjected to another extraction step, using a
urea-based buffer. It is shown that RIPA and urea lysis buffers fractionate
breast tissue proteins primarily on the basis of molecular weights. The average
molecular weight of proteins that dissolve exclusively in urea buffer is up to
60% higher than in RIPA.Gene Ontology (GO) and Directed Acyclic Graphs (DAG) are 
used to map the collective biological and biophysical attributes of the RIPA and 
urea proteomes. The Cellular Component and Molecular Function annotations reveal 
protein solubilization preferences of the buffers, especially the
compartmentalization and functional distributions.It is shown that nearly all
extracellular matrix proteins (ECM) in the breast tumors and matched normal
tissues are found, nearly exclusively, in the urea fraction, while they are
mostly insoluble in RIPA buffer. Additionally, it is demonstrated that
cytoskeletal and extracellular region proteins are more soluble in urea than in
RIPA, whereas for nuclear, cytoplasmic and mitochondrial proteins, RIPA buffer is
preferred.Extracellular matrix proteins are highly implicated in cancer,
including their proteinase-mediated degradation and remodelling, tumor
development, progression, adhesion and metastasis. Thus, if they are not
efficiently extracted by RIPA buffer, important information may be missed in
cancer research.
CONCLUSION: For proteomics of solid tumors, a two-step extraction process is
recommended. First, proteins in the tumor specimen should be extracted with RIPA 
buffer. Second, the RIPA-insoluble material should be extracted with the
urea-based buffer employed in this work.

DOI: 10.1186/1477-5956-6-30 
PMCID: PMC2600628
PMID: 18950484 


1. BMC Mol Biol. 2008 Oct 1;9:83. doi: 10.1186/1471-2199-9-83.

Identification and characterization of CCAAT/Enhancer Binding proteindelta
(C/EBPdelta) target genes in G0 growth arrested mammary epithelial cells.

Zhang Y(1), Liu T, Yan P, Huang T, Dewille J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Biosciences, Ohio State University, 1925 Coffey Road,
Columbus, OH 43210, USA. zhang.321@osu.edu

BACKGROUND: CCAAT/Enhancer Binding Proteindelta (C/EBPdelta) is a member of the
highly conserved C/EBP family of leucine zipper (bZIP) proteins. C/EBPdelta is
highly expressed in G0 growth arrested mammary epithelial cells (MECs) and "loss 
of function" alterations in C/EBPdelta have been associated with impaired contact
inhibition, increased genomic instability and increased cell migration. Reduced
C/EBPdelta expression has also been reported in breast cancer and acute myeloid
leukemia (AML). C/EBPdelta functions as a transcriptional activator, however,
only a limited number of C/EBPdelta target genes have been reported. As a result,
the role of C/EBPdelta in growth control and the potential mechanisms by which
"loss of function" alterations in C/EBPdelta contribute to tumorigenesis are
poorly understood. The goals of the present study were to identify C/EBPdelta
target genes using Chromatin Immunoprecipitation coupled with a CpG Island
(HCG12K) Array gene chip ("ChIP-chip") assay and to assess the expression and
potential functional roles of C/EBPdelta target genes in growth control.
RESULTS: ChIP-chip assays identified approximately 100 C/EBPdelta target gene
loci which were classified by gene ontology (GO) into cell adhesion, cell cycle
regulation, apoptosis, signal transduction, intermediary metabolism, gene
transcription, DNA repair and solute transport categories. Conventional ChIP
assays validated the ChIP-chip results and demonstrated that 14/14 C/EBPdelta
target loci were bound by C/EBPdelta in G0 growth arrested MCF-12A MECs.
Gene-specific RT-PCR analysis also demonstrated C/EBPdelta-inducible expression
of 14/14 C/EBPdelta target genes in G0 growth arrested MCF-12A MECs. Finally,
expression of endogenous C/EBPdelta and selected C/EBPdelta target genes was also
demonstrated in contact-inhibited G0 growth arrested nontransformed human MCF-10A
MECs and in mouse HC11 MECs. The results demonstrate consistent activation and
downstream function of C/EBPdelta in growth arrested human and murine MECs.
CONCLUSION: C/EBPdelta target genes were identified by a global gene array
approach and classified into functional categories that are consistent with
biological contexts in which C/EBPdelta is induced, such as contact-mediated G0
growth arrest, apoptosis, metabolism and inflammation. The identification and
validation of C/EBPdelta target genes provides new insights into the mechanistic 
role of C/EBPdelta in mammary epithelial cell biology and sheds new light on the 
potential impact of "loss of function" alterations in C/EBPdelta in
tumorigenesis.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2199-9-83 
PMCID: PMC2576343
PMID: 18828910  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Clin Cancer Res. 2008 Sep 15;14(18):5893-9. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-07-4762.

Gene expression profile and angiogenic marker correlates with response to
neoadjuvant bevacizumab followed by bevacizumab plus chemotherapy in breast
cancer.

Yang SX(1), Steinberg SM, Nguyen D, Wu TD, Modrusan Z, Swain SM.

Author information: 
(1)National Clinical Target Validation Laboratory, Division of Cancer Treatment
and Diagnosis, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda,
Maryland, USA. xy32m@nih.gov

Comment in
    Clin Cancer Res. 2009 Jan 1;15(1):414; author reply 414-5.

PURPOSE: To identify biomarkers and gene expression profile signatures to
distinguish patients with partial response (PR) from those with stable disease
(SD) and progressive disease (PD).
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Twenty patients with inflammatory breast cancer and one
patient with locally advanced breast cancer received one cycle of bevacizumab
followed by six cycles of bevacizumab plus docetaxel-doxorubicin before surgery. 
Baseline angiogenic/tumor markers were examined by immunohistochemistry and gene 
expression profiles were measured by Agilent Whole Human Genome arrays. All were 
assessed for clinical response.
RESULTS: Fourteen patients (67%, 95% confidence interval, 43-85.4%) had PR, five 
had SD, and two had PD. Expression of CD31 and platelet-derived growth factor
receptor-beta (PDGFR-beta) in the tumor vasculature by immunohistochemistry was
significantly associated with response (PR versus SD/PD; CD31 median, 33.5 versus
13.2; P = 0.0004; PDGFR-beta median, 5.9 versus 0.6; P = 0.01). Tumor VEGF-A
showed a trend towards association with response (2.65 versus 0.25; P = 0.04).
pVEGFR2(Y996), pVEGFR2(Y951), MVD, Ki67, apoptosis, grade, ER, HER-2/neu, and p53
were not associated with response. Twenty-six of 1,339 Gene Ontology (GO) classes
at the gene transcriptional level were differentially expressed between patients 
with PR and SD/PD (P < 0.005). Representative significant GO classes include
spindle (11 genes; P = 0.001), vascular endothelial growth factor receptor
activity including PDGFR-beta (5 genes; P = 0.002), and cell motility including
CD31 (80 genes; P = 0.005).
CONCLUSIONS: Baseline CD31, PDGFR-beta, and GO classes for vascular endothelial
growth factor receptor activity and mitosis were significantly associated with
response to bevacizumab followed by bevacizumab plus chemotherapy.

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-07-4762 
PMCID: PMC2587275
PMID: 18794102  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Mol Biol Cell. 2008 Sep;19(9):3745-57. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E08-02-0154. Epub 2008
Jun 25.

Global gene expression analysis identifies PDEF transcriptional networks
regulating cell migration during cancer progression.

Turner DP(1), Findlay VJ, Kirven AD, Moussa O, Watson DK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Hollings Cancer Center,
Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC 29425, USA.

Prostate derived ETS factor (PDEF) is an ETS (epithelial-specific E26
transforming sequence) family member that has been identified as a potential
tumor suppressor. In multiple invasive breast cancer cells, PDEF expression
inhibits cell migration by preventing the acquisition of directional
morphological polarity conferred by changes in cytoskeleton organization. In this
study, microarray analysis was used to identify >200 human genes that displayed a
common differential expression pattern in three invasive breast cancer cell lines
after expression of exogenous PDEF protein. Gene ontology associations and data
mining analysis identified focal adhesion, adherens junctions, cell adhesion, and
actin cytoskeleton regulation as cell migration-associated interaction pathways
significantly impacted by PDEF expression. Validation experiments confirmed the
differential expression of four cytoskeleton-associated genes with known
functional associations with these pathways: uPA, uPAR, LASP1, and VASP.
Significantly, chromatin immunoprecipitation studies identified PDEF as a direct 
negative regulator of the metastasis-associated gene uPA and phenotypic rescue
experiments demonstrate that exogenous urokinase plasminogen activator (uPA)
expression can restore the migratory ability of invasive breast cancer cells
expressing PDEF. Furthermore, immunofluorescence studies identify the subcellular
relocalization of urokinase plasminogen activator receptor (uPAR), LIM and SH3
protein (LASP1), and vasodilator-stimulated protein (VASP) as a possible
mechanism accounting for the loss of morphological polarity observed upon PDEF
expression.

DOI: 10.1091/mbc.E08-02-0154 
PMCID: PMC2526691
PMID: 18579687  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. J Proteome Res. 2008 Aug;7(8):3583-90. doi: 10.1021/pr800229j. Epub 2008 Jun 25.

Proteome profile of human breast cancer tissue generated by LC-ESI-MS/MS combined
with sequential protein precipitation and solubilization.

Gong Y(1), Wang N, Wu F, Cass CE, Damaraju S, Mackey JR, Li L.

Author information: 
(1)PolyomX Program, Cross Cancer Institute, Alberta Cancer Board, and Department 
of Chemistry, Oncology, and Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, University of
Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.

Comprehensive proteome profiling of breast cancer tissue samples is challenging, 
as the tissue samples contain many proteins with varying concentrations and
modifications. We report an effective sample preparation strategy combined with
liquid chromatography (LC) electrospray ionization (ESI) quadrupole
time-of-flight (QTOF) MS/MS for proteome analysis of human breast cancer tissue. 
The complexity of the breast cancer tissue proteome was reduced by using protein 
precipitation from a tissue extract, followed by sequential protein
solubilization in solvents of different solubilizing strength. The individual
fractions of protein mixtures or subproteomes were subjected to trypsin digestion
and the resultant peptides were separated by strong cation exchange (SCX)
chromatography, followed by reversed-phase capillary LC combined with high
resolution and high accuracy ESI-QTOF MS/MS. This approach identified 14407
unique peptides from 3749 different proteins based on peptide matches with scores
above the threshold scores at the 95% confidence level in MASCOT database search 
of the acquired MS/MS spectra. The false positive rate of peptide matches was
determined to be 0.95% by using the target-decoy sequence search strategy. On the
basis of gene ontology categorization, the identified proteins represented a wide
variety of biological functions, cellular processes, and cellular locations.

DOI: 10.1021/pr800229j 
PMID: 18576677  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2008 Nov;134(11):1237-45. doi:
10.1007/s00432-008-0396-0. Epub 2008 Apr 30.

Differential expression of cancer-related genes by single and permanent exposure 
to bone morphogenetic protein 2.

Steinert S(1), Kroll TC, Taubert I, Pusch L, Hortschansky P, Höffken K, Wölfl S, 
Clement JH.

Author information: 
(1)Clinic for Internal Medicine II, Friedrich-Schiller-University Jena, Erlanger 
Allee 101, 07740, Jena, Germany.

PURPOSE: Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) are multifunctional regulators of
various cell functions. The BMP-signalling network plays a pivotal role during
embryogenesis and tumorigenesis. BMPs, e.g. BMP-2 exert their biological function
in a time and concentration-dependent manner but also modulated by the context of
the cellular microenvironment. In this study, we investigated the effect of a
steady high level of BMP-2 versus a single application of BMP-2 on the breast
cancer cell line MCF-7.
METHODS: The effect of the incubation regimes was analysed by DNA microarray
expression profiling. Data were verified by real-time PCR. The protein expression
of apoptosis-related genes was studied by western blot analysis.
RESULTS: We found a clear difference in the altered gene expression between the
constant high level and the single application of BMP-2. After grouping the genes
of interest into the biological processes of Gene Ontology, the group of
apoptosis-related genes like BAX, BAG5 or PKR, was predominantly affected under
the single-application regime of BMP-2. Among these protein kinase R was the most
prominently regulated. Further studies on the protein level showed activation of 
PKR after 4 h with a subsequent enhanced phosphorylation of the PKR substrate
eIF2alpha for several hours.
CONCLUSIONS: The duration of treatment and the concentration of BMP-2 affect the 
global expression pattern of MCF-7 cells. Among the regulated cancer-related
genes, the cohort of the apoptosis-related genes showed the pronounced
alterations. Our data point to a novel role of BMP-2 in the regulation of the PKR
pathway in tumorigenesis.

DOI: 10.1007/s00432-008-0396-0 
PMID: 18446370  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. BMC Genomics. 2008 Apr 16;9:177. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-9-177.

A gene sets approach for identifying prognostic gene signatures for outcome
prediction.

Kim SY(1), Kim YS.

Author information: 
(1)Human Genomics Laboratory, Functional Genomics Research Center, KRIBB, Daejeon
305-806, Korea. kimsy@kribb.re.kr

BACKGROUND: Gene expression profiling is a promising approach to better estimate 
patient prognosis; however, there are still unresolved problems, including little
overlap among similarly developed gene sets and poor performance of a developed
gene set in other datasets.
RESULTS: We applied a gene sets approach to develop a prognostic gene set from
multiple gene expression datasets. By analyzing 12 independent breast cancer gene
expression datasets comprising 1,756 tissues with 2,411 pre-defined gene sets
including gene ontology categories and pathways, we found many gene sets that
were prognostic in most of the analyzed datasets. Those prognostic gene sets were
related to biological processes such as cell cycle and proliferation and had
additional prognostic values over conventional clinical parameters such as tumor 
grade, lymph node status, estrogen receptor (ER) status, and tumor size. We then 
estimated the prediction accuracy of each gene set by performing external
validation using six large datasets and identified a gene set with an average
prediction accuracy of 67.55%.
CONCLUSION: A gene sets approach is an effective method to develop prognostic
gene sets to predict patient outcome and to understand the underlying biology of 
the developed gene set. Using the gene sets approach we identified many
prognostic gene sets in breast cancer.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2164-9-177 
PMCID: PMC2364634
PMID: 18416850  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Am J Pathol. 2008 May;172(5):1381-90. doi: 10.2353/ajpath.2008.070988. Epub 2008 
Apr 10.

Molecular characterization of human breast tumor vascular cells.

Bhati R(1), Patterson C, Livasy CA, Fan C, Ketelsen D, Hu Z, Reynolds E, Tanner
C, Moore DT, Gabrielli F, Perou CM, Klauber-DeMore N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel
Hill, North Carolina, USA.

A detailed understanding of the assortment of genes that are expressed in breast 
tumor vessels is needed to facilitate the development of novel, molecularly
targeted anti-angiogenic agents for breast cancer therapies. Rapid
immunohistochemistry using factor VIII-related antibodies was performed on
sections of frozen human luminal-A breast tumors (n = 5) and normal breast (n =
5), followed by laser capture microdissection of vascular cells. RNA was
extracted and amplified, and fluorescently labeled cDNA was synthesized and
hybridized to 44,000-element long-oligonucleotide DNA microarrays. Statistical
analysis of microarray was used to compare differences in gene expression between
tumor and normal vascular cells, and Expression Analysis Systematic Explorer was 
used to determine enrichment of gene ontology categories. Protein expression of
select genes was confirmed using immunohistochemistry. Of the 1176 genes that
were differentially expressed between tumor and normal vascular cells, 55 had a
greater than fourfold increase in expression level. The extracellular matrix gene
ontology category was increased while the ribosome gene ontology category was
decreased. Fibroblast activation protein, secreted frizzled-related protein 2,
Janus kinase 3, and neutral sphingomyelinase 2 proteins localized to breast tumor
endothelium as assessed by immunohistochemistry, showing significantly greater
staining compared with normal tissue. These tumor endothelial marker proteins
also exhibited increased expression in breast tumor vessels compared with that in
normal tissues. Therefore, these genetic markers may serve as potential targets
for the development of angiogenesis inhibitors.

DOI: 10.2353/ajpath.2008.070988 
PMCID: PMC2329846
PMID: 18403594  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Bioinformatics. 2008 Feb 15;24(4):537-44. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btm628.
Epub 2008 Jan 18.

Multiple testing on the directed acyclic graph of gene ontology.

Goeman JJ(1), Mansmann U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Statistics, Postzone S5-P, P.O. Box 9600, 2300 RC
Leiden, The Netherlands. j.j.goeman@lumc.nl

MOTIVATION: Current methods for multiplicity adjustment do not make use of the
graph structure of Gene Ontology (GO) when testing for association of expression 
profiles of GO terms with a response variable.
RESULTS: We propose a multiple testing method, called the focus level procedure, 
that preserves the graph structure of Gene Ontology (GO). The procedure is
constructed as a combination of a Closed Testing procedure with Holm's method. It
requires a user to choose a 'focus level' in the GO graph, which reflects the
level of specificity of terms in which the user is most interested. This choice
also determines the level in the GO graph at which the procedure has most power. 
We prove that the procedure strongly controls the family-wise error rate without 
any additional assumptions on the joint distribution of the test statistics used.
We also present an algorithm to calculate multiplicity-adjusted P-values. Because
the focus level procedure preserves the structure of the GO graph, it does not
generally preserve the ordering of the raw P-values in the adjusted P-values.
AVAILABILITY: The focus level procedure has been implemented in the globaltest
and GlobalAncova packages, both of which are available on www.bioconductor.org.

DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btm628 
PMID: 18203773  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Methods. 2008 Jan;44(1):61-72.

Computational methods for analysis of cellular functions and pathways
collectively targeted by differentially expressed microRNA.

Gusev Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma
City, OK, USA. yuriy-gusev@ouhsc.edu

This report presents computational methods of analysis of cellular processes,
functions, and pathways affected by differentially expressed microRNA, a
statistical basis of the gene enrichment analysis method, a modification of
enrichment analysis method accounting for combinatorial targeting of Gene
Ontology categories by multiple miRNAs and examples of the global functional
profiling of predicted targets of differentially expressed miRNAs in cancer. We
have also summarized an application of Ingenuity Pathway Analysis tools for in
depth analysis of microRNA target sets that may be useful for the biological
interpretation of microRNA profiling data. To illustrate the utility of these
methods, we report the main results of our recent computational analysis of five 
published datasets of aberrantly expressed microRNAs in five human cancers
(pancreatic cancer, breast cancer, colon cancer, lung cancer, and lymphoma).
Using a combinatorial target prediction algorithm and statistical enrichment
analysis, we have determined Gene Ontology categories as well as biological
functions, disease categories, toxicological categories, and signaling pathways
that are: targeted by multiple microRNAs; statistically significantly enriched
with target genes; and known to be affected in specific cancers. Our recent
computational analysis of predicted targets of co-expressed miRNAs in five human 
cancers suggests that co-expressed miRNAs provide systemic compensatory response 
to the abnormal phenotypic changes in cancer cells by targeting a broad range of 
functional categories and signaling pathways reportedly affected in a particular 
cancer.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymeth.2007.10.005 
PMID: 18158134  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Int J Cancer. 2008 Apr 1;122(7):1557-66.

Gene expression abnormalities in histologically normal breast epithelium of
breast cancer patients.

Tripathi A(1), King C, de la Morenas A, Perry VK, Burke B, Antoine GA, Hirsch EF,
Kavanah M, Mendez J, Stone M, Gerry NP, Lenburg ME, Rosenberg CL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Boston University School of Medicine and Boston
Medical Center, Boston, MA 02118, USA.

Normal-appearing epithelium of cancer patients can harbor occult genetic
abnormalities. Data comprehensively comparing gene expression between
histologically normal breast epithelium of breast cancer patients and cancer-free
controls are limited. The present study compares global gene expression between
these groups. We performed microarrays using RNA from microdissected
histologically normal terminal ductal-lobular units (TDLU) from 2 groups: (i)
cancer normal (CN) (TDLUs adjacent to untreated ER+ breast cancers (n = 14)) and 
(ii) reduction mammoplasty (RM) (TDLUs of age-matched women without breast
disease (n = 15)). Cyber-T identified differentially expressed genes.
Quantitative RT-PCR (qRT-PCR), immunohistochemistry (IHC), and comparison to
independent microarray data including 6 carcinomas in situ (CIS), validated the
results. Gene ontology (GO), UniProt and published literature evaluated gene
function. About 127 probesets, corresponding to 105 genes, were differentially
expressed between CN and RM (p < 0.0009, corresponding to FDR <0.10). 104/127
(82%) probesets were also differentially expressed between CIS and RM, nearly
always (102/104 (98%)) in the same direction as in CN vs. RM. Two-thirds of the
105 genes were implicated previously in carcinogenesis. Overrepresented
functional groups included transcription, G-protein coupled and chemokine
receptor activity, the MAPK cascade and immediate early genes. Most genes in
these categories were under-expressed in CN vs. RM. We conclude that global gene 
expression abnormalities exist in normal epithelium of breast cancer patients and
are also present in early cancers. Thus, cancer-related pathways may be perturbed
in normal epithelium. These abnormalities could be markers of disease risk,
occult disease, or the tissue's response to an existing tumor.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.23267 
PMID: 18058819  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. BMC Bioinformatics. 2007 Nov 1;8 Suppl 7:S16.

Computational analysis of biological functions and pathways collectively targeted
by co-expressed microRNAs in cancer.

Gusev Y(1), Schmittgen TD, Lerner M, Postier R, Brackett D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma
City, Oklahoma, USA. yuriy-gusev@ouhsc.edu

BACKGROUND: Multiple recent studies have found aberrant expression profiles of
microRNAome in human cancers. While several target genes have been experimentally
identified for some microRNAs in various tumors, the global pattern of cellular
functions and pathways affected by co-expressed microRNAs in cancer remains
elusive. The goal of this study was to develop a computational approach to global
analysis of the major biological processes and signaling pathways that are most
likely to be affected collectively by co-expressed microRNAs in cancer cells.
RESULTS: We report results of computational analysis of five datasets of
aberrantly expressed microRNAs in five human cancers published by the authors
(pancreatic cancer) and others (breast cancer, colon cancer, lung cancer and
lymphoma). Using the combinatorial target prediction algorithm miRgate and a
two-step data reduction procedure we have determined Gene Ontology categories as 
well as biological functions, disease categories, toxicological categories and
signaling pathways that are: targeted by multiple microRNAs; statistically
significantly enriched with target genes; and known to be affected in specific
cancers.
CONCLUSION: Our global analysis of predicted miRNA targets suggests that
co-expressed miRNAs collectively provide systemic compensatory response to the
abnormal phenotypic changes in cancer cells by targeting a broad range of
functional categories and signaling pathways known to be affected in a particular
cancer. Such systems biology based approach provides new avenues for biological
interpretation of miRNA profiling data and generation of experimentally testable 
hypotheses regarding collective regulatory functions of miRNA in cancer.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2105-8-S7-S16 
PMCID: PMC2099484
PMID: 18047715  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. BMC Syst Biol. 2007 Nov 27;1:56.

Gene regulatory networks in lactation: identification of global principles using 
bioinformatics.

Lemay DG(1), Neville MC, Rudolph MC, Pollard KS, German JB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food Science and Technology, University of California, One
Shields Ave,, Davis, CA 95616, USA. dglemay@ucdavis.edu

BACKGROUND: The molecular events underlying mammary development during pregnancy,
lactation, and involution are incompletely understood.
RESULTS: Mammary gland microarray data, cellular localization data,
protein-protein interactions, and literature-mined genes were integrated and
analyzed using statistics, principal component analysis, gene ontology analysis, 
pathway analysis, and network analysis to identify global biological principles
that govern molecular events during pregnancy, lactation, and involution.
CONCLUSION: Several key principles were derived: (1) nearly a third of the
transcriptome fluctuates to build, run, and disassemble the lactation apparatus; 
(2) genes encoding the secretory machinery are transcribed prior to lactation;
(3) the diversity of the endogenous portion of the milk proteome is derived from 
fewer than 100 transcripts; (4) while some genes are differentially transcribed
near the onset of lactation, the lactation switch is primarily
post-transcriptionally mediated; (5) the secretion of materials during lactation 
occurs not by up-regulation of novel genomic functions, but by widespread
transcriptional suppression of functions such as protein degradation and
cell-environment communication; (6) the involution switch is primarily
transcriptionally mediated; and (7) during early involution, the transcriptional 
state is partially reverted to the pre-lactation state. A new hypothesis for
secretory diminution is suggested - milk production gradually declines because
the secretory machinery is not transcriptionally replenished. A comprehensive
network of protein interactions during lactation is assembled and new regulatory 
gene targets are identified. Less than one fifth of the transcriptionally
regulated nodes in this lactation network have been previously explored in the
context of lactation. Implications for future research in mammary and cancer
biology are discussed.

DOI: 10.1186/1752-0509-1-56 
PMCID: PMC2225983
PMID: 18039394  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. BMC Cancer. 2007 Sep 25;7:182.

Pathway analysis of gene signatures predicting metastasis of node-negative
primary breast cancer.

Yu JX(1), Sieuwerts AM, Zhang Y, Martens JW, Smid M, Klijn JG, Wang Y, Foekens
JA.

Author information: 
(1)Veridex LLC, a Johnson & Johnson Company, 3210 Merryfield Row, San Diego, CA
92121, USA. jyu9@vrxus.jnj.com

BACKGROUND: Published prognostic gene signatures in breast cancer have few genes 
in common. Here we provide a rationale for this observation by studying the
prognostic power and the underlying biological pathways of different gene
signatures.
METHODS: Gene signatures to predict the development of metastases in estrogen
receptor-positive and estrogen receptor-negative tumors were identified using 500
re-sampled training sets and mapping to Gene Ontology Biological Process to
identify over-represented pathways. The Global Test program confirmed that gene
expression profilings in the common pathways were associated with the metastasis 
of the patients.
RESULTS: The apoptotic pathway and cell division, or cell growth regulation and
G-protein coupled receptor signal transduction, were most significantly
associated with the metastatic capability of estrogen receptor-positive or
estrogen-negative tumors, respectively. A gene signature derived of the common
pathways predicted metastasis in an independent cohort. Mapping of the pathways
represented by different published prognostic signatures showed that they share
53% of the identified pathways.
CONCLUSION: We show that divergent gene sets classifying patients for the same
clinical endpoint represent similar biological processes and that pathway-derived
signatures can be used to predict prognosis. Furthermore, our study reveals that 
the underlying biology related to aggressiveness of estrogen receptor subgroups
of breast cancer is quite different.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2407-7-182 
PMCID: PMC2077336
PMID: 17894856  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Pharmacogenet Genomics. 2007 Oct;17(10):813-26.

Changes in breast cancer transcriptional profiles after treatment with the
aromatase inhibitor, letrozole.

Miller WR(1), Larionov AA, Renshaw L, Anderson TJ, White S, Murray J, Murray E,
Hampton G, Walker JR, Ho S, Krause A, Evans DB, Dixon JM.

Author information: 
(1)Breast Research Group, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK.
w.r.miller@ed.ac.uk

OBJECTIVE: The aim of the study was to identify changes in tumour expression
profiling associated with short-term therapy of breast cancer patients with
letrozole.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Microarray analysis was performed on RNA extracted from
paired tumour core biopsies taken before and after 14 days of treatment with
letrozole (2.5 mg/daily) in 58 patients. Changes in expression profile were
identified by three different approaches on the basis of frequency of changes,
magnitude of changes and significance analysis of microarray.
RESULTS: No single gene was consistently changed by therapy in all cases.
Fifty-two genes, however, were downregulated and 36 upregulated in at least 45 of
the 58 cases. In terms of quantitative change, 46 genes showed at least a median 
1.5-fold change in expression. Significance analysis of microarray identified 62 
genes that were significantly changed by therapy (P<0.0001, 56 downregulated and 
six upregulated). All three approaches showed that greater numbers of genes were 
downregulated rather than upregulated. Merging data produced a total of 143
genes, which were subject to gene ontology and cluster analysis. The ontology of 
the 91 downregulated genes showed that they were functionally associated with
cell cycle progression, particularly mitosis. In contrast, upregulated genes were
associated with organ development, connective tissue extracellular matrix
regulation and inflammatory response. Cluster analysis segregated the patients
into four groups differing in patterns of gene expression.
CONCLUSION: Genes have been identified which either change markedly or
consistently in breast cancer after 14 days treatment with letrozole. These are
new important data in understanding letrozole's molecular mechanism of action in 
breast cancers.

DOI: 10.1097/FPC.0b013e32820b853a 
PMID: 17885619  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. BMC Cancer. 2007 Sep 20;7:181.

An integrated analysis of genes and pathways exhibiting metabolic differences
between estrogen receptor positive breast cancer cells.

Mandal S(1), Davie JR.

Author information: 
(1)Manitoba Institute of Cell Biology, University of Manitoba, 675 McDermot
Avenue, Winnipeg Manitoba, R3E 0V9, Canada. mandals0@cc.umanitoba.ca

BACKGROUND: The sex hormone estrogen (E2) is pivotal to normal mammary gland
growth and differentiation and in breast carcinogenesis. In this in silico study,
we examined metabolic differences between ER(+)ve breast cancer cells during E2
deprivation.
METHODS: Public repositories of SAGE and MA gene expression data generated from
E2 deprived ER(+)ve breast cancer cell lines, MCF-7 and ZR75-1 were compared with
normal breast tissue. We analyzed gene ontology (GO), enrichment, clustering,
chromosome localization, and pathway profiles and performed multiple comparisons 
with cell lines and tumors with different ER status.
RESULTS: In all GO terms, biological process (BP), molecular function (MF), and
cellular component (CC), MCF-7 had higher gene utilization than ZR75-1. Various
analyses showed a down-regulated immune function, an up-regulated protein
(ZR75-1) and glucose metabolism (MCF-7). A greater percentage of 77 common genes 
localized to the q arm of all chromosomes, but in ZR75-1 chromosomes 11, 16, and 
19 harbored more overexpressed genes. Despite differences in gene utilization
(electron transport, proteasome, glycolysis/gluconeogenesis) and expression
(ribosome) in both cells, there was an overall similarity of ZR75-1 with ER(-)ve 
cell lines and ER(+)ve/ER(-)ve breast tumors.
CONCLUSION: This study demonstrates integral metabolic differences may exist
within the same cell subtype (luminal A) in representative ER(+)ve cell line
models. Selectivity of gene and pathway usage for strategies such as energy
requirement minimization, sugar utilization by ZR75-1 contrasted with MCF-7
cells, expressing genes whose protein products require ATP utilization. Such
characteristics may impart aggressiveness to ZR75-1 and may be prognostic
determinants of ER(+)ve breast tumors.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2407-7-181 
PMCID: PMC2148057
PMID: 17883861  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Yi Chuan. 2007 Sep;29(9):1061-6.

[Finding finer functions for proteins related to breast cancer based on protein
interaction network].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang J(1), Li YH, Guo Z, Zhu J, Ma WC, Peng CF, Liu Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioinformatics, Pharmacology and Bio-pharmaceutical Key
Laboratory of Heilongjiang Province and State, Harbin Medi-cal University, Harbin
150086, China. bioccwj@126.com

Breast cancer is one of the most common malignant tumours. However, the existing 
functional knowledge about the proteins related to the breast cancer is too
general to promote the following study. To find their finer functions, we suggest
using the function-specific interaction sub-networks by integrating the
functional knowledge of Gene Ontology and the protein-protein interaction
network. The results show that the proposed approach is able to reliably find
finer functions for these proteins with high precision. The predicted finer
functions are highly valuable for guiding the follow-up wet-lab re-search to
study the molecular mechanism of breast cancer.


PMID: 17855254  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2007 Aug-Sep;106(1-5):130-42. Epub 2007 May 29.

Aromatase inhibitors--gene discovery.

Miller WR(1), Larionov A, Renshaw L, Anderson TJ, White S, Hampton G, Walker JR, 
Ho S, Krause A, Evans DB, Dixon JM.

Author information: 
(1)Breast Research Group, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom.
wmiller@staffmail.edu.ac.uk

Microarray analysis of tumour RNA is an extremely powerful tool which allows
global gene expression to be measured. When used in combination with neoadjuvant 
treatment protocols in which therapy is given with the primary tumour within the 
breast, sequential biopsies may be analysed and results correlated with clinical 
and pathological response. In the present study, a neoadjuvant protocol has been 
used, administering the third generation inhibitor, letrozole, for 3 months and
subjecting RNA extracted from biopsies taken before and after 10-14 days of
treatment to microarray analysis. The objectives were to discover: (i) genes that
change with estrogen deprivation (the only known biological effect of letrozole
is to inhibit aromatase activity and reduce endogenous estrogens in
postmenopausal women) and (ii) genes whose basal, on treatment or change in
expression differ between tumours which are either responsive or resistant to
treatment (so that predictive indices of response/resistance may be developed).
Early changes in gene expression were identified by comparing paired tumour core 
biopsies taken before and after 14 days treatment in 58 patients using three
different approaches based on frequency of changes, magnitude of changes and SAM 
analysis. All three approaches showed a greater number of genes were
down-regulated than up-regulated. Merging of the data produced a total of 143
genes which were subject to gene ontology and cluster analysis. The ontology of
the 91 down-regulated genes showed that they were functionally associated with
cell cycle progression, particularly mitosis. In contrast, up-regulated genes
were associated with organ development and extra-cellular matrix turnover and
regulation. Clinical response was assessable in 52 patients; 37 (71%) tumours
were classified as clinical responders (>50% reduction in volume at 3 months).
Microarray analysis of pre- and 14-day biopsies identified 291 covariates (84
baselines, 72 14-day and 135 changes) highly predictive of response status. A
similarity matrix using the covariates showed responding tumours have a similar
genetic profile which was dissimilar to non-responding cancers whereas
non-responsive cases were distinctive from each other. Changed genes predicting
for response showed no concordance with those changed significantly by treatment 
in the overall group.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jsbmb.2007.05.013 
PMID: 17616392  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Anticancer Res. 2007 May-Jun;27(3A):1295-300.

A microarray approach to translational medicine in breast cancer: how
representative are cell line models of clinical conditions?

Mehta JP(1), O'Driscoll L, Barron N, Clynes M, Doolan P.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute for Cellular Biotechnology, Dublin City University, Dublin,
Ireland. mehtaj2@mail.dcu.ie

The aim of this study was to examine whether the degree to which cell lines model
corresponding cells in vivo is an important aspect of their value as models in
studying disease processes.MATERIALS AND METHODS: The work presented here
utilizes gene expression data from two published microarray datasets to compare
the differences and similarities among the two systems in order to identify major
transcriptional changes in the adaptation process from a tissue to a cell line.
RESULTS: Gene ontology and pathway analyses of comparator gene lists showed that 
the cell cycle related genes were significantly up-regulated in cell lines and
immune response related genes were significantly up-regulated in clinical
specimens. Estrogen receptor analysis also indicated differences in the
clustering patterns of cell lines relative to clinical specimens.
CONCLUSION: These findings suggest that significant differences in gene
expression exist between clinical conditions and their respective cell line
models and that these differences should be taken into account when extrapolating
cell line results to in vivo systems.


PMID: 17593622  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Bioinformatics. 2007 Aug 15;23(16):2104-12. Epub 2007 Jun 6.

Significance analysis of groups of genes in expression profiling studies.

Chen JJ(1), Lee T, Delongchamp RR, Chen T, Tsai CA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Personalized Nutrition and Medicine, National Center for
Toxicological Research, FDA, Jefferson, AR 72079, USA. jchen@nctr.fda.gov

MOTIVATION: Gene class testing (GCT) is a statistical approach to determine
whether some functionally predefined classes of genes express differently under
two experimental conditions. GCT computes the P-value of each gene class based on
the null distribution and the gene classes are ranked for importance in
accordance with their P-values. Currently, two null hypotheses have been
considered: the Q1 hypothesis tests the relative strength of association with the
phenotypes among the gene classes, and the Q2 hypothesis assesses the statistical
significance. These two hypotheses are related but not equivalent.
METHOD: We investigate three one-sided and two two-sided test statistics under Q1
and Q2. The null distributions of gene classes under Q1 are generated by
permuting gene labels and the null distributions under Q2 are generated by
permuting samples.
RESULTS: We applied the five statistics to a diabetes dataset with 143 gene
classes and to a breast cancer dataset with 508 GO (Gene Ontology) terms. In each
statistic, the null distributions of the gene classes under Q1 are different from
those under Q2 in both datasets, and their rankings can be different too. We
clarify the one-sided and two-sided hypotheses, and discuss some issues regarding
the Q1 and Q2 hypotheses for gene class ranking in the GCT. Because Q1 does not
deal with correlations among genes, we prefer test based on Q2.
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformatics
online.

DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btm310 
PMID: 17553853  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. J Mammary Gland Biol Neoplasia. 2007 Mar;12(1):25-35.

Mammary gland involution as a multi-step process.

Stein T(1), Salomonis N, Gusterson BA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer Sciences and Molecular Pathology, Section of Gene
Regulation and Mechanisms of Disease, Western Infirmary, University of Glasgow,
Glasgow G11 6NT, UK.

Mammary gland involution is a highly complex multi-step process in which the
lactating gland returns to a morphologically near pre-pregnant state. This
developmental stage is characterized by a high degree of epithelial cell death,
redevelopment of the mammary adipose tissue and tissue remodelling. Many factors 
involved have been described and these have been reviewed intensively in this
journal (Furth, P. A., J. Mammary Gland Biol. Neoplasia, 4:123-127, 1999) and
elsewhere. Microarray analysis technology has now not only allowed us to identify
genes not previously associated with involution (Stein, T., Morris, J.S., Davis, 
C.R.,Weber-Hall, S.J., Duffy, M.A., Heath, V.J., et al., Breast Cancer Res., 6:
R75-R91, 2004; Clarkson, R.W., Wayland, M.T., Lee, J., Freeman, T., Watson, C.J.,
Breast Cancer Res., 6: R92-R109, 2004; Clarkson, R.W., Watson, C.J., J. Mammary
Gland Biol. Neoplasia, 8: 309-319, 2003), it has also enabled us to define
multiple phases of the controlled regulatory response to forced weaning on the
basis of their transcriptional profiles. This review provides a synthesis of
published data, integrating the time course of transcriptional activity in the
mouse mammary gland with a gene ontology approach to identify the pathways
involved.

DOI: 10.1007/s10911-007-9035-7 
PMID: 17431797  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Clin Biochem. 2007 Apr;40(7):499-502. Epub 2007 Jan 17.

Functional identity of genes detectable in expression profiling assays following 
globin mRNA reduction of peripheral blood samples.

Field LA(1), Jordan RM, Hadix JA, Dunn MA, Shriver CD, Ellsworth RE, Ellsworth
DL.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Breast Care Project, Windber Research Institute, Windber, PA 15963,
USA.

OBJECTIVES: Whole-blood RNA for microarray analysis is easily accessible but
contains a large proportion of globin mRNA that interferes with the accurate
assessment of other genes. This study investigated the biological significance of
genes whose expression was unmasked by globin mRNA reduction in peripheral blood.
DESIGN AND METHODS: Samples were collected from healthy subjects using the
PAXgene Blood RNA System, and globin mRNA was depleted using GLOBINclear. Genes
exhibiting consistent changes in expression on Affymetrix HU133A 2.0 arrays were 
characterized in three main areas of gene ontology--molecular function,
biological process, and cellular component.
RESULTS: Globin reduction permitted detection of 2652+/-395 additional genes per 
assay. Genes unmasked by globin reduction include low abundance transcripts that 
function primarily as molecular binding proteins and catalytic enzymes in
biological processes including transcription, replication, and intracellular
transport and signalling. Protein products of these genes are preferentially
associated with membranes and the nucleus.
CONCLUSIONS: Additional genes detectable only after globin reduction in
whole-blood RNA function in a variety of biological processes that may be
important to diverse fields of study.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clinbiochem.2007.01.004 
PMID: 17303101  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Mol Cancer. 2007 Feb 5;6:13.

Integrative analysis of a cancer somatic mutome.

Hernández P(1), Solé X, Valls J, Moreno V, Capellá G, Urruticoechea A, Pujana MA.

Author information: 
(1)Bioinformatics and Biostatistics Unit, and Translational Research Laboratory, 
Catalan Institute of Oncology, IDIBELL, L'Hospitalet, Barcelona, Spain.
phgutierrez@ico.scs.es

BACKGROUND: The consecutive acquisition of genetic alterations characterizes
neoplastic processes. As a consequence of these alterations, molecular
interactions are reprogrammed in the context of highly connected and regulated
cellular networks. The recent identification of the collection of somatically
mutated genes in breast tumors (breast cancer somatic "mutome") allows the
comprehensive study of its function and organization in complex networks.
RESULTS: We analyzed functional genomic data (loss of heterozygosity, copy number
variation and gene expression in breast tumors) and protein binary interactions
from public repositories to identify potential novel components of neoplastic
processes, the functional relationships between them, and to examine their
coordinated function in breast cancer pathogenesis. This analysis identified
candidate tumor suppressors and oncogenes, and new genes whose expression level
predicts survival rate in breast cancer patients. Mutome network modeling using
different types of pathological and healthy functional relationships unveils
functional modules significantly enriched in genes or proteins (genes/proteins)
with related biological process Gene Ontology terms and containing known breast
cancer-related genes/proteins.
CONCLUSION: This study presents a comprehensive analysis of the breast somatic
mutome, highlighting those genes with a higher probability of playing a
determinant role in tumorigenesis and better defining molecular interactions
related to the neoplastic process.

DOI: 10.1186/1476-4598-6-13 
PMCID: PMC1797053
PMID: 17280605  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Oncogene. 2007 Jul 5;26(31):4600-8. Epub 2007 Jan 29.

Identification of a metastasis signature and the DLX4 homeobox protein as a
regulator of metastasis by combined transcriptome approach.

Tomida S(1), Yanagisawa K, Koshikawa K, Yatabe Y, Mitsudomi T, Osada H, Takahashi
T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Carcinogenesis, Center for Neurological Diseases and
Cancer, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine, Nagoya, Japan.

Although widespread metastasis is the major cause of human lung cancer-related
deaths, its underlying mechanism remains largely unclear. Our genome-wide
comparison of the expression profiles of a highly metastatic lung cancer cell
line, NCI-H460-LNM35 (LNM35), and its parental clone, NCI-H460-N15 (N15),
resulted in the identification of a cancer metastasis signature composed of 45
genes. Through gene ontology analysis, our study also provided insights into how 
this 45-gene metastasis signature may contribute to the acquisition of metastatic
potential. By applying the signature to datasets of human cancer cases, we could 
demonstrate significant associations with a subset of cases with poor prognosis
not only for the two datasets of cancers of the lung but also for cancers of the 
breast. Furthermore, we were able to show that enforced expression of the DLX4
homeobox gene, which was identified as a gene with significant downregulation in 
LNM35 as well as with significant association with favorable prognosis for lung
cancer patients, markedly inhibited in vitro motility and invasion as well as in 
vivo metastasis via both hematogenous and lymphogenous routes. Taken together,
these findings indicate that our combined transcriptome analysis is an efficient 
approach in the search for genes possessing both clinical usefulness in terms of 
prognostic prediction in human cancer cases and clear functional relevance for
studying cancer biology in relation to metastasis.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.onc.1210242 
PMID: 17260014  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Cancer Res. 2007 Jan 15;67(2):702-8.

2-methoxyestradiol inhibits the anaphase-promoting complex and protein
translation in human breast cancer cells.

Bhati R(1), Gökmen-Polar Y, Sledge GW Jr, Fan C, Nakshatri H, Ketelsen D,
Borchers CH, Dial MJ, Patterson C, Klauber-DeMore N.

Author information: 
(1)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, Department of Biochemistry and
Biophysics, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North
Carolina 27599, USA.

2-methoxyestradiol (2ME2), an estradiol metabolite with antiproliferative and
antiangiogenic activities, is in phase I/II clinical trials for breast cancer.
2ME2 inhibits microtubule polymerization and causes cells to arrest in G2-M. The 
purpose of this study was to further elucidate the molecular mechanism of 2ME2.
MDA-MB-435 breast cancer cells were treated with 2ME2 (2 micromol/L) or vehicle
alone. RNA was extracted and genomic profiling was done using 22k Agilent
microarrays. Expression Analysis Systematic Explorer was used to determine
enrichment of Gene Ontology categories. Protein isolates were subjected to
Western blot analysis. Protein synthesis was measured with a [35S]methionine
pulse assay. An MDA-MB-435 cell line with two beta-tubulin mutations (2ME2R) was 
used to determine whether novel mechanisms were tubulin-dependent. Gene Ontology 
categories enriched include genes that regulate the mitotic spindle assembly
checkpoint, apoptosis, and the cytosolic ribosome. The target of the mitotic
spindle assembly checkpoint is the anaphase-promoting complex (APC). APC
inhibition was confirmed by measuring protein levels of its targets securin and
cyclin B1, which were increased in 2ME2-treated cells. Because gene expression in
the cytosolic ribosome category was decreased, we evaluated whether 2ME2
decreases protein translation. This was confirmed with a pulse assay, which
showed decreased isotope incorporation in 2ME2-treated cells, which was
maintained in the tubulin-resistant 2ME2R cells. APC inhibition was not
maintained in 2ME2R cells. 2ME2 induces tubulin-dependent cell cycle arrest
through regulation of genes involved in the mitotic spindle assembly checkpoint, 
which results in inhibition of the APC and tubulin-independent inhibition of
protein translation.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-06-3406 
PMID: 17234781  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Proteomics. 2007 Jan;7(2):323-9.

NanoLC-FT-ICR MS improves proteome coverage attainable for approximately 3000
laser-microdissected breast carcinoma cells.

Umar A(1), Luider TM, Foekens JA, Pasa-Tolić L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Erasmus Medical Center Rotterdam, Josephine
Nefkens Institute, The Netherlands. a.umar@erasmusmc.nl

Proteomics assays hold great promise for unraveling molecular events that
underlie human diseases. Effective analysis of clinical samples is essential, but
this task is considerably complicated by tissue heterogeneity. Laser capture
microdissection (LCM) can be used to selectively isolate target cells from their 
native tissue environment. However, the small number of cells that is typically
procured by LCM severely limits proteome coverage and biomarker discovery
potential achievable by conventional proteomics platforms. Herein, we describe
the use of nanoLC-FT-ICR MS for analyzing protein digests of 3000 LCM-derived
tumor cells from breast carcinoma tissue, corresponding to 300 ng of total
protein. A total of 2282 peptides were identified by matching LC-MS data to
accurate mass and time (AMT) tag databases that were previously established for
human breast (cancer) cell lines. One thousand and three unique proteins were
confidently identified with two or more peptides. Based on gene ontology
categorization, identified proteins appear to cover a wide variety of biological 
functions and cellular compartments. This work demonstrates that a substantial
number of proteins can be detected and identified from limited number of cells
using the AMT tag approach, and opens doors for high-throughput in-depth
proteomics analysis of clinical samples.

DOI: 10.1002/pmic.200600293 
PMID: 17163580  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Clin Chem. 2006 Oct;52(10):1897-905. Epub 2006 Aug 17.

Multilectin affinity chromatography for characterization of multiple glycoprotein
biomarker candidates in serum from breast cancer patients.

Yang Z(1), Harris LE, Palmer-Toy DE, Hancock WS.

Author information: 
(1)Barnett Institute and Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology,
Northeastern University, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

BACKGROUND: Glycoproteins are often associated with cancer and are important in
serum studies, for which glycosylation is a common posttranslational
modification.
METHODS: We used multilectin affinity chromatography (M-LAC) to isolate
glycoproteins from the sera of breast cancer patients and controls. The proteins 
were identified by HPLC-tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) analysis of the
corresponding tryptic digests. We used the FuncAssociate Gene Ontology program
for association analysis of the identified proteins. Biomarker candidates in
these groups were comparatively quantitated by use of peak area measurements,
with inclusion of an internal standard. We analyzed data for concordance within
the ontology association groups for vector of change with the development of
breast cancer.
RESULTS: Detection of the known low-concentration biomarker HER-2 (8-24 mug/L)
enabled us to establish a dynamic range of 10(6), relative to the amount of
albumin, for the depletion step. We then used ELISA to confirm this range.
Proteins associated with lipid transport and metabolism, cell growth and
maintenance, ion homeostasis, and protease inhibition were found to be
differentially regulated in serum from women with breast cancer compared with
serum from women without breast cancer.
CONCLUSIONS: M-LAC for isolation of the serum glycoproteome, coupled with liquid 
chromatography-MS/MS and the use of gene ontology associations, can be used to
characterize large panels of candidate markers, which can then be evaluated in a 
particular patient population.

DOI: 10.1373/clinchem.2005.065862 
PMID: 16916992  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 May 16;103(20):7735-40. Epub 2006 May 9.

Genetic variation in putative regulatory loci controlling gene expression in
breast cancer.

Kristensen VN(1), Edvardsen H, Tsalenko A, Nordgard SH, Sørlie T, Sharan R,
Vailaya A, Ben-Dor A, Lønning PE, Lien S, Omholt S, Syvänen AC, Yakhini Z,
Børresen-Dale AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Institute of Cancer Research,
Rikshospitalet-Radiumhospitalet Medical Center, Montebello, 0310 Oslo, Norway.

Candidate single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were analyzed for associations
to an unselected whole genome pool of tumor mRNA transcripts in 50 unrelated
patients with breast cancer. SNPs were selected from 203 candidate genes of the
reactive oxygen species pathway. We describe a general statistical framework for 
the simultaneous analysis of gene expression data and SNP genotype data measured 
for the same cohort, which revealed significant associations between subsets of
SNPs and transcripts, shedding light on the underlying biology. We identified
SNPs in EGF, IL1A, MAPK8, XPC, SOD2, and ALOX12 that are associated with the
expression patterns of a significant number of transcripts, indicating the
presence of regulatory SNPs in these genes. SNPs were found to act in trans in a 
total of 115 genes. SNPs in 43 of these 115 genes were found to act both in cis
and in trans. Finally, subsets of SNPs that share significantly many common
associations with a set of transcripts (biclusters) were identified. The subsets 
of transcripts that are significantly associated with the same set of SNPs or to 
a single SNP were shown to be functionally coherent in Gene Ontology and pathway 
analyses and coexpressed in other independent data sets, suggesting that many of 
the observed associations are within the same functional pathways. To our
knowledge, this article is the first study to correlate SNP genotype data in the 
germ line with somatic gene expression data in breast tumors. It provides the
statistical framework for further genotype expression correlation studies in
cancer data sets.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0601893103 
PMCID: PMC1458617
PMID: 16684880  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Anal Biochem. 2006 Jun 1;353(1):43-56. Epub 2006 Apr 3.

Strategies for comparing gene expression profiles from different microarray
platforms: application to a case-control experiment.

Severgnini M(1), Bicciato S, Mangano E, Scarlatti F, Mezzelani A, Mattioli M,
Ghidoni R, Peano C, Bonnal R, Viti F, Milanesi L, De Bellis G, Battaglia C.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical Technologies, National Research Council, Milan, Italy.

Meta-analysis of microarray data is increasingly important, considering both the 
availability of multiple platforms using disparate technologies and the
accumulation in public repositories of data sets from different laboratories. We 
addressed the issue of comparing gene expression profiles from two microarray
platforms by devising a standardized investigative strategy. We tested this
procedure by studying MDA-MB-231 cells, which undergo apoptosis on treatment with
resveratrol. Gene expression profiles were obtained using high-density,
short-oligonucleotide, single-color microarray platforms: GeneChip (Affymetrix)
and CodeLink (Amersham). Interplatform analyses were carried out on 8414 common
transcripts represented on both platforms, as identified by LocusLink ID,
representing 70.8% and 88.6% of annotated GeneChip and CodeLink features,
respectively. We identified 105 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) on CodeLink
and 42 DEGs on GeneChip. Among them, only 9 DEGs were commonly identified by both
platforms. Multiple analyses (BLAST alignment of probes with target sequences,
gene ontology, literature mining, and quantitative real-time PCR) permitted us to
investigate the factors contributing to the generation of platform-dependent
results in single-color microarray experiments. An effective approach to
cross-platform comparison involves microarrays of similar technologies, samples
prepared by identical methods, and a standardized battery of bioinformatic and
statistical analyses.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ab.2006.03.023 
PMID: 16624241  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Arch Gynecol Obstet. 2006 Jun;274(3):146-9. Epub 2006 Apr 6.

Interaction between BRCA1 and human papilloma virus E7: an ontology study.

Wiwanitkit V(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn
University, Bangkok 10330, Thailand. wviroj@pioneer.netserv.chula.ac.th

BRCA1 was the first breast cancer susceptibility gene to be identified and
cloned. Recent studies indicate that BRCA 1 interacts with and regulates the
activity of estrogen receptor alpha. The correlation between BRCA1 and E7 of
papilloma virus becomes a new interesting topic in gynecological cancer.
According to this study, E7 can add no function or aberration to the BRCA1
molecule. Further experimental studies are needed before making a conclusion on
this topic. The finding in this study not only supports the previous knowledge on
BRCA1 but also gives a new view on the function of BRCA1 and E7 in breast cancer.
Here, the author used a new gene ontology technology to predict the molecular
function and biological process of BRCA1 and E7.

DOI: 10.1007/s00404-006-0153-z 
PMID: 16598475  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. BMC Bioinformatics. 2006 Mar 16;7:147.

Ensemble attribute profile clustering: discovering and characterizing groups of
genes with similar patterns of biological features.

Semeiks JR(1), Rizki A, Bissell MJ, Mian IS.

Author information: 
(1)Life Sciences Division (MS 977-225A), Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, 1
Cyclotron Road, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA. jrs@farviolet.com

BACKGROUND: Ensemble attribute profile clustering is a novel, text-based strategy
for analyzing a user-defined list of genes and/or proteins. The strategy exploits
annotation data present in gene-centered corpora and utilizes ideas from
statistical information retrieval to discover and characterize properties shared 
by subsets of the list. The practical utility of this method is demonstrated by
employing it in a retrospective study of two non-overlapping sets of genes
defined by a published investigation as markers for normal human breast luminal
epithelial cells and myoepithelial cells.
RESULTS: Each genetic locus was characterized using a finite set of biological
properties and represented as a vector of features indicating attributes
associated with the locus (a gene attribute profile). In this study, the vector
space models for a pre-defined list of genes were constructed from the Gene
Ontology (GO) terms and the Conserved Domain Database (CDD) protein domain terms 
assigned to the loci by the gene-centered corpus LocusLink. This data set of GO- 
and CDD-based gene attribute profiles, vectors of binary random variables, was
used to estimate multiple finite mixture models and each ensuing model utilized
to partition the profiles into clusters. The resultant partitionings were
combined using a unanimous voting scheme to produce consensus clusters, sets of
profiles that co-occurred consistently in the same cluster. Attributes that were 
important in defining the genes assigned to a consensus cluster were identified. 
The clusters and their attributes were inspected to ascertain the GO and CDD
terms most associated with subsets of genes and in conjunction with external
knowledge such as chromosomal location, used to gain functional insights into
human breast biology. The 52 luminal epithelial cell markers and 89 myoepithelial
cell markers are disjoint sets of genes. Ensemble attribute profile
clustering-based analysis indicated that both lists contained groups of genes
with the functional properties of membrane receptor biology/signal transduction
and nucleic acid binding/transcription. A subset of the luminal markers was
associated with metabolic and oxidoreductase activities, whereas a subset of
myoepithelial markers was associated with protein hydrolase activity.
CONCLUSION: Given a set of genes and/or proteins associated with a phenomenon,
process or system of interest, ensemble attribute profile clustering provides a
simple method for collating and sythesizing the annotation data pertaining to
them that are present in text-based, gene-centered corpora. The results provide
information about properties common and unique to subsets of the list and hence
insights into the biology of the problem under investigation.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2105-7-147 
PMCID: PMC1435935
PMID: 16542449  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Oncogene. 2006 Mar 2;25(9):1413-9.

Laser microdissection and microarray analysis of breast tumors reveal ER-alpha
related genes and pathways.

Yang F(1), Foekens JA, Yu J, Sieuwerts AM, Timmermans M, Klijn JG, Atkins D, Wang
Y, Jiang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Veridex LLC, a Johnson and Johnson Company, 3210 Merryfield Row, San Diego, CA
92121, USA.

About 70-80% of breast cancers express estrogen receptor alpha (ER-alpha), and
estrogens play important roles in the development and growth of hormone-dependent
tumors. Together with lymph node metastasis, tumor size, and histological grade, 
ER status is considered as one of the prognostic factors in breast cancer, and an
indicator for hormonal treatment. To investigate genes and pathways that are
associated with ER status and epithelial cells in breast tumor, we applied laser 
capture microdissection (LCM) technology to capture epithelial tumor cells from
28 lymph node-negative breast tumor samples, in which 17 patients had ER-alpha+
tumors, and 11 patients have ER-alpha- tumors. Gene expression profiles were
analysed on Affymetrix Hu133A GeneChip. Meanwhile, gene profiles using total RNA 
isolated from bulk tumors of the same 28 patients were also generated. In total, 
146 genes and 112 genes with significant P-value and having significant
differential expression between ER-alpha+ and ER-alpha- tumors were identified
from the LCM data set and bulk tissue data set, respectively. A total of 61 genes
were found to be common in both data sets, while 85 genes were unique to the LCM 
data set and 51 genes were present only in the bulk tumor data set. Pathway
analysis with the 85 genes using Gene Ontology suggested that genes involved in
endocytosis, ceramide generation, Ras/ERK/Ark cascade, and JAT-STAT pathways may 
play roles related to ER. The gene profiling with LCM-captured tumor cells
provides a unique approach to study epithelial tumor cells and to gain an insight
into signaling pathways associated with ER.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.onc.1209165 
PMID: 16261164  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Bioinformatics. 2005 Sep 1;21 Suppl 2:ii93-100.

Prediction of regulatory modules comprising microRNAs and target genes.

Yoon S(1), De Micheli G.

Author information: 
(1)Computer Systems Laboratory, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.
sryoon@stanford.edu

MOTIVATION: MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small endogenous RNAs that can play important 
regulatory roles via the RNA-interference pathway by targeting mRNAs for cleavage
or translational repression. We propose a computational method to predict miRNA
regulatory modules (MRMs) or groups of miRNAs and target genes that are believed 
to participate cooperatively in post-transcriptional gene regulation.
RESULTS: We tested our method with the human genes and miRNAs, predicting 431
MRMs. We analyze a module with genes: BTG2, WT1, PPM1D, PAK7 and RAB9B, and
miRNAs: miR-15a and miR-16. Review of the literature and annotation with Gene
Ontology terms reveal that the roles of these genes can indeed be closely related
in specific biological processes, such as gene regulation involved in breast,
renal and prostate cancers. Furthermore, it has been reported that miR-15a and
miR-16 are deleted together in certain types of cancer, suggesting a possible
connection between these miRNAs and cancers. Given that most known
functionalities of miRNAs are related to negative gene regulation, extending our 
approach and exploiting the insight thus obtained may provide clues to achieving 
practical accuracy in the reverse-engineering of gene regulatory networks.
AVAILABILITY: A list of predicted modules is available from the authors upon
request.

DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/bti1116 
PMID: 16204133  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Clin Cancer Res. 2005 Sep 1;11(17):6226-32.

Gene expression patterns and profile changes pre- and post-erlotinib treatment in
patients with metastatic breast cancer.

Yang SX(1), Simon RM, Tan AR, Nguyen D, Swain SM.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Therapeutics Branch in Center for Cancer Research , National Cancer
Institute, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland 20889, USA. xy32m@nih.gov

PURPOSE: To delineate gene expression patterns and profile changes in metastatic 
tumor biopsies at baseline and 1 month after treatment with the epidermal growth 
factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitor erlotinib in patients with
metastatic breast cancer.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Patients were treated with 150 mg of oral erlotinib daily.
Gene expression profiles were measured with Affymetrix U133A GeneChip and
immunohistochemistry was used to validate microarray findings.
RESULTS: Estrogen receptor (ER) status by immunohistochemistry is nearly
coincided with the two major expression clusters determined by expression of
genes using unsupervised hierarchical clustering analysis. One of 10 patients had
an EGFR-positive tumor detected by both microarray and immunohistochemistry. In
this tumor, tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases-3 and collagen type 1 alpha 2,
which are the EGF-down-regulated growth repressors, were significantly increased 
by erlotinib. Gene changes in EGFR-negative tumors are those of G-protein-linked 
and cell surface receptor-linked signaling. Gene ontology comparison analysis
pretreatment and posttreatment in EGFR-negative tumors revealed biological
process categories that have more genes differentially expressed than expected by
chance. Among 495 gene ontology categories, the significant differed gene
ontology groups include G-protein-coupled receptor protein signaling (34 genes, P
= 0.002) and cell surface receptor-linked signal transduction (74 genes, P =
0.007).
CONCLUSIONS: ER status reflects the major difference in gene expression pattern
in metastatic breast cancer. Erlotinib had effects on genes of EGFR signaling
pathway in the EGFR-positive tumor and on gene ontology biological process
categories or genes that have function in signal transduction in EGFR-negative
tumors.

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-05-0270 
PMID: 16144925  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. BMC Genomics. 2005 Mar 11;6:37.

Gene expression signature of estrogen receptor alpha status in breast cancer.

Abba MC(1), Hu Y, Sun H, Drake JA, Gaddis S, Baggerly K, Sahin A, Aldaz CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Carcinogenesis, The University of Texas M,D, Anderson Cancer
Center, Science Park-Research Division, Smithville, Texas, USA.
mabba777@hotmail.com <mabba777@hotmail.com>

BACKGROUND: Estrogens are known to regulate the proliferation of breast cancer
cells and to modify their phenotypic properties. Identification of
estrogen-regulated genes in human breast tumors is an essential step toward
understanding the molecular mechanisms of estrogen action in cancer. To this end 
we generated and compared the Serial Analysis of Gene Expression (SAGE) profiles 
of 26 human breast carcinomas based on their estrogen receptor alpha (ER) status.
Thus, producing a breast cancer SAGE database of almost 2.5 million tags,
representing over 50,000 transcripts.
RESULTS: We identified 520 transcripts differentially expressed between
ERalpha-positive (+) and ERalpha-negative (-) primary breast tumors (Fold change 
>or= 2; p < 0.05). Furthermore, we identified 220 high-affinity Estrogen
Responsive Elements (EREs) distributed on the promoter regions of 163 out of the 
473 up-modulated genes in ERalpha (+) breast tumors. In brief, we observed
predominantly up-regulation of cell growth related genes, DNA binding and
transcription factor activity related genes based on Gene Ontology (GO)
biological functional annotation. GO terms over-representation analysis showed a 
statistically significant enrichment of various transcript families including:
metal ion binding related transcripts (p = 0.011), calcium ion binding related
transcripts (p = 0.033) and steroid hormone receptor activity related transcripts
(p = 0.031). SAGE data associated with ERalpha status was compared with reported 
information from breast cancer DNA microarrays studies. A significant proportion 
of ERalpha associated gene expression changes was validated by this
cross-platform comparison. However, our SAGE study also identified novel sets of 
genes as highly expressed in ERalpha (+) invasive breast tumors not previously
reported. These observations were further validated in an independent set of
human breast tumors by means of real time RT-PCR.
CONCLUSION: The integration of the breast cancer comparative transcriptome
analysis based on ERalpha status coupled to the genome-wide identification of
high-affinity EREs and GO over-representation analysis, provide useful
information for validation and discovery of signaling networks related to
estrogen response in this malignancy.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2164-6-37 
PMCID: PMC555753
PMID: 15762987  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2005 Jan 1;33(Database issue):D533-6.

Cancer gene expression database (CGED): a database for gene expression profiling 
with accompanying clinical information of human cancer tissues.

Kato K(1), Yamashita R, Matoba R, Monden M, Noguchi S, Takagi T, Nakai K.

Author information: 
(1)Osaka Medical Center for Cancer and Cardiovascular Diseases, 1-3-2 Nakamichi, 
Higashinari-ku, Osaka 537-8511, Japan. katou-ki@mc.pref.osaka.jp

Gene expression profiling of cancer tissues is expected to contribute to our
understanding of cancer biology as well as developments of new methods of
diagnosis and therapy. Our collaborative efforts in Japan have been mainly
focused on solid tumors such as breast, colorectal and hepatocellular cancers.
The expression data are obtained by a high-throughput RT-PCR technique, and
patients are recruited mainly from a single hospital. In the cancer gene
expression database (CGED), the expression and clinical data are presented in a
way useful for scientists interested in specific genes or biological functions.
The data can be retrieved either by gene identifiers or by functional categories 
defined by Gene Ontology terms or the Swiss-Prot annotation. Expression patterns 
of multiple genes, selected by names or similarity search of the patterns, can be
compared. Visual presentation of the data with sorting function enables users to 
easily recognize of relationships between gene expression and clinical
parameters. Data for other cancers such as lung and thyroid cancers will be added
in the near future. The URL of CGED is http://cged.hgc.jp.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gki117 
PMCID: PMC540071
PMID: 15608255  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Int J Biol Markers. 2003 Oct-Dec;18(4):241-72.

Functional relationship and gene ontology classification of breast cancer
biomarkers.

Arciero C(1), Somiari SB, Shriver CD, Brzeski H, Jordan R, Hu H, Ellsworth DL,
Somiari RI.

Author information: 
(1)General Surgery Services, Walter Reed Army Medical Center, Washington, DC,
USA.

Breast cancer is a complex disease that still imposes a significant healthcare
burden on women worldwide. The etiology of breast cancer is not known but
significant advances have been made in the area of early detection and treatment.
The advent of advanced molecular biology techniques, mapping of the human genome 
and availability of high throughput genomic and proteomic strategies opens up new
opportunities and will potentially lead to the discovery of novel biomarkers for 
early detection and prognostication of breast cancer. Currently, many biomarkers,
particularly the hormonal and epidermal growth factor receptors, are being
utilized for breast cancer prognosis. Unfortunately, none of the biomarkers in
use have sufficient diagnostic, prognostic and/or predictive power across all
categories and stages of breast cancer. It is recognized that more useful
information can be generated if tumors are interrogated with multiple markers.
But choosing the right combination of biomarkers is challenging, because 1)
multiple pathways are involved, 2) up to 62 genes and their protein products are 
potentially involved in breast cancer-related mechanisms and 3) the more markers 
evaluated, the more the time and cost involved. This review summarizes the
current literature on selected biomarkers for breast cancer, discusses the
functional relationships, and groups the selected genes based on a Gene Ontology 
classification.


PMID: 14756541  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Cancer Res. 2003 Nov 1;63(21):7158-66.

The gene expression response of breast cancer to growth regulators: patterns and 
correlation with tumor expression profiles.

Cunliffe HE(1), Ringnér M, Bilke S, Walker RL, Cheung JM, Chen Y, Meltzer PS.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Genetics Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute/NIH, 50 South
Drive, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

The effects of hormone and growth factor signaling on gene expression contribute 
significantly to breast tumorigenesis and disease progression; however, the
targets of signaling networks associated with deregulated growth are not well
understood. We defined the dynamic transcriptional effects elicited in MCF7,
T-47D, and MDA-MB-436 breast cancer cell lines by nine regulators of growth and
differentiation (17beta-estradiol, antiestrogens fulvestrant and tamoxifen,
progestin R5020, antiprogestin RU486, all-trans-retinoic acid, epidermal growth
factor, mitogen-activated protein/extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2
inhibitor U0126 and phorbol ester 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate) and
compared the patterns of gene regulation to published tumor expression profiles. 
The complex pattern of response to these agents revealed unexpected relationships
between their effects, including a profound overlap in genes regulated by both
steroids and epidermal growth factor, and striking overlaps between fulvestrant
and all-trans-retinoic acid. Estrogen-responsive genes could be divided into two 
major clusters, only one of which is associated with cell proliferation. Gene
ontology analysis was used to highlight functionally distinct biological
responses to different mitogens. Significant correlations were identified between
several clusters of drug-responsive genes and genes that discriminate estrogen
receptor status or disease outcome in patient samples. The majority of estrogen
receptor status discriminators were not responsive in our dataset and are
therefore likely to reflect underlying differences in histogenesis and disease
progression rather than growth factor signaling. This article highlights the
overall impact at the gene expression level of diverse regulators of breast
cancer growth and links the behavior of breast cancer cells in culture to
important clinical properties of human breast tumors.


PMID: 14612509  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1. Genomics. 2003 Feb;81(2):98-104.

Global functional profiling of gene expression.

Draghici S(1), Khatri P, Martins RP, Ostermeier GC, Krawetz SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computer Science, Wayne State University, 5143 Cass Avenue,
Detroit, MI 48202, USA. sod@cs.wayne.edu

The typical result of a microarray experiment is a list of tens or hundreds of
genes found to be differentially regulated in the condition under study.
Independent of the methods used to select these genes, the common task faced by
any researcher is to translate these lists of genes into a better understanding
of the biological phenomena involved. Currently, this is done through a tedious
combination of searches through the literature and a number of public databases. 
We developed Onto-Express (OE) as a novel tool able to automatically translate
such lists of differentially regulated genes into functional profiles
characterizing the impact of the condition studied. OE constructs functional
profiles (using Gene Ontology terms) for the following categories: biochemical
function, biological process, cellular role, cellular component, molecular
function, and chromosome location. Statistical significance values are calculated
for each category. We demonstrate the validity and the utility of this
comprehensive global analysis of gene function by analyzing two breast cancer
datasets from two separate laboratories. OE was able to identify correctly all
biological processes postulated by the original authors, as well as discover
novel relevant mechanisms.


PMID: 12620386  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

